# Distribution of CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 polymorphisms associated with poor metabolizer phenotype in five Amerindian groups and western Mestizos from Mexico.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Joel Salazar-Flores, Luis A Torres-Reyes, Gabriela Martínez-Cortés, Rodrigo Rubi-Castellanos, Martha Sosa-Macías, José F Muñoz-Valle, César González-González, Angélica Ramírez, Raquel Román, José L Méndez, Andrés Barrera, Alfredo Torres, Rafael Medina, Héctor Rangel-Villalobos
**Journal:** Genetic testing and molecular biomarkers
**Year:** 2012
**PMID:** 22913530

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** The distribution of polymorphisms in the CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 genes allows inferring the potential risk for specific adverse drug reactions and lack of therapeutic effects in humans. This variability shows differences among human populations. The aim of this study was to analyze single-nucleotide polymorphisms related to a poor metabolizer (PM) phenotype in nonpreviously studied Amerindian groups and Mestizos (general admixed population) from Mexico.

**METHODS:** We detected by SNaPshot(®) different polymorphisms located in CYP2D6 (*3, *4, *6, *7, and *8) and CYP2C19 (*2, *3, *4 and *5) in western Mestizos (n=145) and five Amerindian groups from Mexico: Tarahumaras from the North (n=88); Purépechas from the Center (n=101); and Tojolabales (n=68), Tzotziles (n=88), and Tzeltales (n=20) from the Southeast. Genotypes were observed by capillary electrophoresis. The genetic relationships among these populations were estimated based on these genes.

**RESULTS AND DISCUSSION:** The wild-type allele (*1) of both genes was predominant in the Mexican populations studied. The most widely observed alleles were CYP2C19*2 (range, 0%-31%) and CYP2D6*4 (range, 1.2%-7.3%), whereas CYP2D6*3 was exclusively detected in Mestizos. Conversely, CYP2C19*4 and *5, as well as CYP2D6*3, *6, *7, and *8, were not observed in the majority of the Mexican populations. The Tarahumaras presented a high frequency of the allele CYP2C19*2 (31%) and of homozygotes *2/*2 (10.7%), which represent a high frequency of potentially PM phenotypes in this Amerindian group. The genetic distances showed high differentiation of Tarahumaras (principally for CYP2C19 gene). In general, a relative proximity was observed between most of the Amerindian, Mexican-Mestizo, and Latin-American populations.

**CONCLUSION:** In general, the wild-type allele (*1) predominates in Mexican populations, outlining a relatively homogeneous distribution for CYP2C19 and CYP2D6. The exception is the Tarahumara group that displays a potentially increased risk for adverse reactions to CYP2C19-metabolized drugs.
