# Impact of CYP2C19 polymorphism on platelet function tests and coagulation and inflammatory biomarkers in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Koichi Kaikita, Takamichi Ono, Satomi Iwashita, Naoki Nakayama, Koji Sato, Eiji Horio, Shinichi Nakamura, Kenichi Tsujita, Shinji Tayama, Seiji Hokimoto, Tomohiro Sakamoto, Koichi Nakao, Shuichi Oshima, Seigo Sugiyama, Hisao Ogawa
**Journal:** Journal of atherosclerosis and thrombosis
**Year:** 2014
**PMID:** 24088578

## Abstract

**AIM:** Carriers of the reduced-function CYP2C19 allele receiving dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) with aspirin and clopidogrel exhibit diminished platelet inhibition and an increased risk of events. The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of CYP2C19 gene variants on platelet function tests and coagulation and inflammatory biomarkers in patients undergoing elective percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI).

**METHODS:** This prospective, observational, multicenter study enrolled 104 consecutive Japanese patients undergoing elective PCI. We examined the CYP2C19 genotype, platelet function tests, the levels of coagulation and inflammatory biomarkers and the serum levels of high-sensitivity troponin T (hs-TnT) before, immediately after and one, two and 28 days after PCI.

**RESULTS:** A total of 68 (65%) of the 104 enrolled patients were carriers of the CYP2C19 reducedfunction allele. On-clopidogrel platelet aggregation (PA), measured using light transmittance aggregometry and the VerifyNow(®) P2Y12 system, and the platelet reactivity index (PRI) were significantly higher at all time points in the carriers than in the noncarriers (p＜0.05), whereas there were no differences in the levels of the coagulation and inflammatory biomarkers or serum hs-TnT. Simple and multiple logistic regression analyses identified on-clopidogrel PA and PRI as being significant predictors of carriers of the CYP2C19 reduced-function allele.

**CONCLUSIONS:** The present study suggests that platelet function tests, but not coagulation, inflammatory or cardiac biomarkers, are useful for identifying carriers of CYP2C19 reduced-function gene variants and monitoring the efficacy of DAPT in patients undergoing elective PCI.
