# Genome-wide association study reveals shared and distinct genetic architecture of fatty acids and oxylipins in the Hispanic Community Health Study/Study of Latinos.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Carolina G Downie, Heather M Highland, Mona Alotaibi, Barrett M Welch, Annie Green Howard, Susan Cheng, Nick Miller, Mohit Jain, Robert C Kaplan, Adam G Lilly, Tao Long, Tamar Sofer, Bharat Thyagarajan, Bing Yu, Kari E North, Christy L Avery
**Journal:** HGG advances
**Year:** 2025
**PMID:** 39644095

## Abstract

Bioactive fatty acid-derived oxylipin molecules play key roles mediating inflammation and oxidative stress. Circulating levels of fatty acids and oxylipins are influenced by environmental and genetic factors; characterizing the genetic architecture of bioactive lipids could yield new insights into underlying biology. We performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 81 fatty acids and oxylipins in 11,584 Hispanic Community Health Study/Study of Latinos (HCHS/SOL) participants with genetic and lipidomic data measured at study baseline (58.6% female, mean age = 46.1 years (standard deviation 13.8)). Additionally, given the effects of central obesity on inflammation, we examined interactions with waist circumference using two-degree-of-freedom joint tests. Thirty-three of the 81 oxylipins and fatty acids were significantly heritable (heritability range: 0-32.7%). Forty (49.4%) oxylipins and fatty acids had at least one genome-wide significant (p < 6.94E-11) variant resulting in 19 independent genetic loci. Six loci (lead variant minor allele frequency [MAF] range: 0.08-0.50), including desaturase-encoding FADS and OATP1B1 transporter protein-encoding SLCO1B1, exhibited associations with two or more fatty acids and oxylipins. At several of these loci, there was evidence of colocalization of the top variant across fatty acids and oxylipins. The remaining loci were only associated with one oxylipin or fatty acid and included several CYP loci. We also identified an additional rare variant (MAF = 0.002) near CARS2 in two-degree-of-freedom tests. Our analyses revealed shared and distinct genetic architecture underlying fatty acids and oxylipins, providing insights into genetic factors and motivating work to characterize these compounds and elucidate their roles in disease.
