# Updated variant curation expert panel criteria and pathogenicity classifications for 251 variants for RYR1-related malignant hyperthermia susceptibility.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Jennifer J Johnston, Robert T Dirksen, Thierry Girard, Phil M Hopkins, Natalia Kraeva, Mungunsukh Ognoon, K Bailey Radenbaugh, Sheila Riazi, Rachel L Robinson, Louis A Saddic Iii, Nyamkhishig Sambuughin, Richa Saxena, Sarah Shepherd, Kathryn Stowell, James Weber, Seeley Yoo, Henry Rosenberg, Leslie G Biesecker
**Journal:** Human molecular genetics
**Year:** 2022
**PMID:** 35849058

## Abstract

The ClinGen malignant hyperthermia susceptibility (MHS) variant curation expert panel specified the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics/Association of Molecular Pathologists (ACMG/AMP) criteria for RYR1-related MHS and a pilot analysis of 84 variants was published. We have now classified an additional 251 variants for RYR1-related MHS according to current ClinGen standards and updated the criteria where necessary. Criterion PS4 was modified such that individuals with multiple RYR1 variants classified as pathogenic (P), likely pathogenic (LP), or variant of uncertain significance (VUS) were not considered as providing evidence for pathogenicity. Criteria PS1 and PM5 were revised to consider LP variants at the same amino-acid residue as providing evidence for pathogenicity at reduced strength. Finally, PM1 was revised such that if PS1 or PM5 are used PM1, if applicable, should be downgraded to supporting. Of the 251 RYR1 variants, 42 were classified as P/LP, 16 as B/LB, and 193 as VUS. The primary driver of 175 VUS classifications was insufficient evidence supporting pathogenicity, rather than evidence against pathogenicity. Functional data supporting PS3/BS3 was identified for only 13 variants. Based on the posterior probabilities of pathogenicity and variant frequencies in gnomAD, we estimated the prevalence of individuals with RYR1-related MHS pathogenic variants to be between 1/300 and 1/1075, considerably higher than current estimates. We have updated ACMG/AMP criteria for RYR1-related MHS and classified 251 variants. We suggest that prioritization of functional studies is needed to resolve the large number of VUS classifications and allow for appropriate risk assessment. RYR1-related MHS pathogenic variants are likely to be more common than currently appreciated.
