# A high resolution HLA and SNP haplotype map for disease association studies in the extended human MHC

## Metadata
**Authors:** Paul IW de Bakker, Gil Mcvean, Pardis C Sabeti, Marcos M Miretti, Todd Green, Jonathan Marchini, Xiayi Ke, Alienke J Monsuur, Pamela Whittaker, Marcos Delgado, Jonathan Morrison, Angela Richardson, Emily C Walsh, Xiaojiang Gao, Luana Galver, John Hart, David A Hafler, Margaret Pericak-Vance, John A Todd, Mark J Daly, John Trowsdale, Cisca Wijmenga, Tim J Vyse, Stephan Beck, Sarah Shaw Murray, Mary Carrington, Simon Gregory, Panos Deloukas, John D Rioux
**Journal:** Nature genetics
**Date:** 2006 Sep 24
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1885](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1885)
**PMID:** 16998491
**PMCID:** PMC2670196
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2670196/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2670196/pdf/ukmss-4414.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2670196/pdf/ukmss-4414.pdf)

## Abstract

The proteins encoded by the classical HLA class I and class II genes in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) are highly polymorphic and play an essential role in self/non-self immune recognition. HLA variation is a crucial determinant of transplant rejection and susceptibility to a large number of infectious and autoimmune disease1. Yet identification of causal variants is problematic due to linkage disequilibrium (LD) that extends across multiple HLA and non-HLA genes in the MHC2,3. We therefore set out to characterize the LD patterns between the highly polymorphic HLA genes and background variation by typing the classical HLA genes and >7,500 common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and deletion/insertion polymorphisms (DIPs) across four population samples. The analysis provides informative tag SNPs that capture some of the variation in the MHC region and that could be used in initial disease association studies, and provides new insight into the evolutionary dynamics and ancestral origins of the HLA loci and their haplotypes.

## Methods

### DNA samples

Our study includes 90 individuals (30 parent-offspring trios) of the Yoruba people from Ibadan, Nigeria (YRI); 182 Utah residents (29 extended families -average family size of 6.2 - containing 45 unrelated parent-offspring trios) with European ancestry from the Centre d’Etude du Polymorphisme Humain (CEPH) collection (CEU); 45 unrelated Han Chinese from Beijing, China (CHB); and 44 unrelated Japanese from Tokyo, Japan (JPT). These samples correspond to the 269 DNA samples used in Phase I of the International HapMap Project, plus an additional set of 92 CEU samples. Most of this expanded set of CEU samples were also included in our previous studies of the MHC[2](#R2)^,^[3](#R3). To test tag transferability, we studied 330 samples from a celiac disease study conducted in The Netherlands[13](#R13) and 996 samples from a UK systemic lupus erythematosus study[14](#R14). The study was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of the University Medical Center Utrecht and by the London multi-centre research ethics committee (MREC), respectively, and written informed consent was obtained from all the participants.

### Typing of SNPs and insertion/deletion polymorphisms

SNPs and DIPs were identified from the MHC Haplotype Project, dbSNP, and dbMHC databases and selected based on their genomic position. SNPs were typed on the Illumina GoldenGate platform at the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, at Illumina, and at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute or by using using TaqMan Allelic Discrimination Assay at Duke University. Insertion/deletion polymorphisms were typed by TaqMan technology at Duke University. All of the SNP, DIP and HLA typing was completed by June 2005 and preceded the release of Phase II data from the International HapMap Project. The entire list of 7,543 non-redundant variants and their respective genotyping assays are available online (see below). The variants were located in the 7.5 Mb region delimited by rs498548 (position chr6:26000508) and rs2772390 (position chr6:33483033). All coordinates are given relative to NCBI build 34 of the human genome assembly. Raw genotype data collected at the various genotyping centers were collated based on map position. A total of 6,338 variants yielded reliable genotyping assays. Assays considered to be reliable yielded at least 90% total genotypes, fewer than two Mendel errors, and were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (*P* > 0.001). Details of how haplotypes were estimated from genotype data can be found in [Supplementary Note online](#SM).

### HLA typing

HLA typing was carried out at the Laboratory of Genomic Diversity (NCI-FCRDC) using PCR-SSOP (sequence specific oligonucleotide probe) based protocols recommended by the 13th International Histocompatibility Workshop ([http://www.ihwg.org/components/ssopr.htm](http://www.ihwg.org/components/ssopr.htm)). For class I HLA (*A, B*, and *C*) typing the gene fragment containing exon 2, intron 2, and exon 3 was selectively amplified using locus-specific primers. For the class II HLA (DQA1, DQB1 and DRB1) typing only exon 2 was examined. Genotype ambiguities were resolved by direct sequencing of the whole PCR fragment.

### Statistical analysis of LD

To measure LD between biallelic markers we used the *r*^2^ measure of association[26](#R26). To measure the strength of LD between a biallelic SNP, *i*, and the multi-allelic HLA locus, *j*, with *N* alleles, we use relative information, defined as

| Iij=1−HijC∕Hj |
| --- |
where

| Hj=−∑k=1NpklnpkandHijC=−[fi0∑k=1Npk0lnpk0+fi1∑k=1Npk1lnpk1] |
| --- |
pkx is the frequency of the *k*th HLA allele on the ‘*x*’ allele at the SNP (the lack of a superscript indicates unconditional frequencies) and fix is the frequency of the ‘*x*’ allele in the sample. To test for significant association between alleles at two HLA loci, we calculate a *χ*^2^ test statistic and obtain a *P*-value by permutation.

### Selection of tag SNPs

We used the Tagger method[11](#R11) to derive SNP-based tests to capture all observed HLA alleles in the four population samples. For each HLA allele, we first evaluate the maximum *r*^2^ for single-marker tests (based on a single tag). If the maximum *r*^2^ < 1.0, we proceed to evaluate multimarker tests based on multiple SNPs surrounding the HLA allele (up to 500 kb distance), and keep the haplotype test with the highest *r*^2^ to the HLA allele ([Supplementary Table 3](#SD6)).

### Empirical validation

We selected tag SNPs to capture the DQA1*0501 and DQA*0201 alleles (DQ2.5), the DQA1*0201 and DQB1*0202 alleles (DQ2.2), DRB1*1501 and DRB1*0301 in the CEU reference panel. We genotyped these tag SNPs and also performed classical HLA typing for these HLA alleles in the respective disease samples (celiac and SLE), allowing us to evaluate empirically how well these tags can predict the actual allelic state of these HLA genes in the patients. We report the sensitivity and the specificity of these SNP-based tests, as well as the empirical *r*^2^ between the test and the allele ([Table 2](#T2)).

### Analysis of recombination and haplotype structure

Recombination rates and the location of recombination hotspots with strong statistical support were estimation from patterns of genetic variation using previously described methods[27](#R27)^-^[29](#R29). Analyses were carried out separately on each analysis panel (YRI, CEU, CHB+JPT) and results were combined to provide a single genetic map for the region ([Fig. 1](#F1)). In addition, we identified (for each panel) all non-redundant haplotypes with a frequency of ≥10% and consisting of at least 10 SNPs, which are likely to represent the non-recombinant descendants from a single ancestor.

### Estimation of evolutionary trees from haplotype data

We use a simple, heuristic approach to estimate the genealogical history at a given point, *x*, along the chromosome from a set of phased haplotypes (with missing data imputed). The algorithm is initialized by setting the age of each haplotype or lineage, *ti*, to zero. At each step of the algorithm we identify (and remove) all singleton mutations, recording the number that occur unambiguously (see below for a definition of unambiguous) on each lineage as *si*. We then calculate a statistic for each pair of haplotypes

| Fij(x)=Lij5′(x)Lij3′(x) |
| --- |
where Lij5′(x) is the number of SNPs 5′ of position *x* until the first point at which haplotypes *i* and *j* differ (Lij3′(x) is the equivalent number for SNPs 3′ of position *x*). We identify the pairs of haplotypes with the largest statistic, and select among those the pair of haplotypes with the fewest mutations (i.e. the smallest value of *si* + *sj*). This pair of haplotypes is coalesced, generating a new lineage, *k*, by generating ‘recombination’ events at the end points of identity in both haplotypes at both ends. The relative time at which the coalescent takes place is estimated from

| tk=max{ti+si,tj+sj}+c[Lij5′(x)+Lij3′(x)] |
| --- |
where *c* is a constant (we use an arbitrary value of *c* = 100). Recombinant lineages that do not include position *x* are discarded and the process is repeated until a single lineage remains. The algorithm is repeated until a single lineage remains.

The recombination process results in the presence of non-ancestral material in lineages. When calculating identity, this is treated as ‘not identical’. Unambiguous association of a singleton mutation with a lineage is only allowed if all copies of the mutation to be removed have been removed through coalescence (i.e. not through the discarding of recombinants). Due to the heuristic nature of the algorithm, the estimated tree should only be taken as an approximation, but one that performs well in capturing recent haplotype history.

### Search analysis for evidence of historical selection

We used four implementations of the Long Range Haplotype (LRH) test to examine evidence for recent positive selection in the HLA[22](#R22). Long-range association is measured by extended haplotype homozygosity (EHH). For a population of individuals sharing allele t, EHH at a distance x from the locus is defined as the probability that two randomly chosen chromosomes carrying the allele of interest are identical by descent (as assayed by homozygosity at all SNPs)[30](#R30) for the entire interval from the locus to the point *x*. The first two implementations were the traditional approach previously described [22](#R22) where the allele of interest was either a single SNP or a haplotype (between 3 and 10 SNPs). The third implementation was the integrated EHH method recently described[31](#R31). These first three implementations use the other haplotypes present at the locus to control for local recombination rate, this approach might obscure evidence for recurrent selection at a locus. We therefore used a fourth implementation for each SNP in our data, which might be better suited for detecting recurrent sweeps. We measured the genetic distance the haplotype extends before decaying to an EHH of 0.8[27](#R27) (presented in [Figure 4](#F4)).

We visualize the decay of the extended ancestral chromosome (haplotype) on which the allele arose[22](#R22) using the program Bifurcator[32](#R32). The root of each diagram is an allele, identified by an open square. The diagram is bi-directional, portraying both centromere-proximal and centromere-distal LD. Moving in one direction, each marker is an opportunity for a node; the diagram either divides or not based on whether both or only one allele for each adjacent marker is present. Thus, the breakdown of LD away from the allele of interest is portrayed at progressively longer distances. The thickness of the lines corresponds to the number of samples with the indicated long-distance haplotype.

## Supplementary Material

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors would like to thank Drs. Jorge Oksenberg, Phil De Jager and Neil Walker for helpful discussions and their critical reading of the manuscript. The authors are also grateful to Ben Fry for technical assistance with the selection analysis. This project has been funded in whole or in part with federal funds from the National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, under contract N01-CO-12400. The content of this publication does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the Department of Health and Human Services, nor does mention of trade names, commercial products, or organizations imply endorsement by the U.S. Government. This research was supported in part by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, National Cancer Institute, Center for Cancer Research. The Wellcome Trust supported the work of M.M., P.W., M.D., J.M., S.B., J.T., J.A.T. and P.D. The Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation supported J.A.T. The International MS Genetics Consortium supported the work of D.H., S.G., M.P.V., and JDR. This work was also supported by grants from the NIDDK and the NIAID (Autoimmunity Prevention Center Grant U19 AI050864) to JDR.

## Footnotes

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Supplementary Materials

### Supplementary Materials

## References

1. Dupont B, Svejgaard A. HLA and disease. Transplant Proc. 1977;9:1271–4.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/301306/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Transplant%20Proc&title=HLA%20and%20disease&author=B%20Dupont&author=A%20Svejgaard&volume=9&publication_year=1977&pages=1271-4&pmid=301306&)

2. Miretti MM, et al. A high-resolution linkage-disequilibrium map of the human major histocompatibility complex and first generation of tag single-nucleotide polymorphisms. Am J Hum Genet. 2005;76:634–46. doi: 10.1086/429393.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/429393) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1199300/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15747258/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Hum%20Genet&title=A%20high-resolution%20linkage-disequilibrium%20map%20of%20the%20human%20major%20histocompatibility%20complex%20and%20first%20generation%20of%20tag%20single-nucleotide%20polymorphisms&author=MM%20Miretti&volume=76&publication_year=2005&pages=634-46&pmid=15747258&doi=10.1086/429393&)

3. Walsh EC, et al. An integrated haplotype map of the human major histocompatibility complex. Am J Hum Genet. 2003;73:580–90. doi: 10.1086/378101.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/378101) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1180682/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12920676/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Hum%20Genet&title=An%20integrated%20haplotype%20map%20of%20the%20human%20major%20histocompatibility%20complex&author=EC%20Walsh&volume=73&publication_year=2003&pages=580-90&pmid=12920676&doi=10.1086/378101&)

4. Allcock RJ, et al. The MHC haplotype project: a resource for HLA-linked association studies. Tissue Antigens. 2002;59:520–1. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-0039.2002.590609.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1399-0039.2002.590609.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12445322/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Tissue%20Antigens&title=The%20MHC%20haplotype%20project:%20a%20resource%20for%20HLA-linked%20association%20studies&author=RJ%20Allcock&volume=59&publication_year=2002&pages=520-1&pmid=12445322&doi=10.1034/j.1399-0039.2002.590609.x&)

5. Horton R, et al. Gene map of the extended human MHC. Nat Rev Genet. 2004;5:889–99. doi: 10.1038/nrg1489.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg1489) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15573121/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Rev%20Genet&title=Gene%20map%20of%20the%20extended%20human%20MHC&author=R%20Horton&volume=5&publication_year=2004&pages=889-99&pmid=15573121&doi=10.1038/nrg1489&)

6. Stewart CA, et al. Complete MHC haplotype sequencing for common disease gene mapping. Genome Res. 2004;14:1176–87. doi: 10.1101/gr.2188104.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.2188104) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC419796/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15140828/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Res&title=Complete%20MHC%20haplotype%20sequencing%20for%20common%20disease%20gene%20mapping&author=CA%20Stewart&volume=14&publication_year=2004&pages=1176-87&pmid=15140828&doi=10.1101/gr.2188104&)

7. Malkki M, Single R, Carrington M, Thomson G, Petersdorf E. MHC microsatellite diversity and linkage disequilibrium among common HLA-A, HLA-B, DRB1 haplotypes: implications for unrelated donor hematopoietic transplantation and disease association studies. Tissue Antigens. 2005;66:114–24. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.2005.00453.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-0039.2005.00453.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16029431/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Tissue%20Antigens&title=MHC%20microsatellite%20diversity%20and%20linkage%20disequilibrium%20among%20common%20HLA-A,%20HLA-B,%20DRB1%20haplotypes:%20implications%20for%20unrelated%20donor%20hematopoietic%20transplantation%20and%20disease%20association%20studies&author=M%20Malkki&author=R%20Single&author=M%20Carrington&author=G%20Thomson&author=E%20Petersdorf&volume=66&publication_year=2005&pages=114-24&pmid=16029431&doi=10.1111/j.1399-0039.2005.00453.x&)

8. Stenzel A, et al. Patterns of linkage disequilibrium in the MHC region on human chromosome 6p. Hum Genet. 2004;114:377–85. doi: 10.1007/s00439-003-1075-5.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-003-1075-5) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14740295/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hum%20Genet&title=Patterns%20of%20linkage%20disequilibrium%20in%20the%20MHC%20region%20on%20human%20chromosome%206p&author=A%20Stenzel&volume=114&publication_year=2004&pages=377-85&pmid=14740295&doi=10.1007/s00439-003-1075-5&)

9. Limm TM, Ashdown ML, Naughton MJ, McGinnis MD, Simons MJ. HLA-DQA1 allele and suballele typing using noncoding sequence polymorphisms. Application to 4AOHW cell panel typing. Hum Immunol. 1993;38:57–68. doi: 10.1016/0198-8859(93)90520-b.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0198-8859(93)90520-b) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7905870/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hum%20Immunol&title=HLA-DQA1%20allele%20and%20suballele%20typing%20using%20noncoding%20sequence%20polymorphisms.%20Application%20to%204AOHW%20cell%20panel%20typing&author=TM%20Limm&author=ML%20Ashdown&author=MJ%20Naughton&author=MD%20McGinnis&author=MJ%20Simons&volume=38&publication_year=1993&pages=57-68&pmid=7905870&doi=10.1016/0198-8859(93)90520-b&)

10. Simons MJ, et al. Strategy for definition of DR/DQ haplotypes in the 4AOHW cell panel using noncoding sequence polymorphisms. Hum Immunol. 1993;38:69–74. doi: 10.1016/0198-8859(93)90521-2.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0198-8859(93)90521-2) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7905871/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hum%20Immunol&title=Strategy%20for%20definition%20of%20DR/DQ%20haplotypes%20in%20the%204AOHW%20cell%20panel%20using%20noncoding%20sequence%20polymorphisms&author=MJ%20Simons&volume=38&publication_year=1993&pages=69-74&pmid=7905871&doi=10.1016/0198-8859(93)90521-2&)

11. de Bakker PIW, et al. Efficiency and power in genetic association studies. Nat Genet. 2005;37:1217–23. doi: 10.1038/ng1669.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1669) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16244653/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=Efficiency%20and%20power%20in%20genetic%20association%20studies&author=PIW%20de%20Bakker&volume=37&publication_year=2005&pages=1217-23&pmid=16244653&doi=10.1038/ng1669&)

12. Gonzalez-Neira A, et al. The portability of tagSNPs across populations: a worldwide survey. Genome Res. 2006;16:323–30. doi: 10.1101/gr.4138406.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.4138406) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1415211/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16467560/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Res&title=The%20portability%20of%20tagSNPs%20across%20populations:%20a%20worldwide%20survey&author=A%20Gonzalez-Neira&volume=16&publication_year=2006&pages=323-30&pmid=16467560&doi=10.1101/gr.4138406&)

13. Monsuur AJ, et al. Myosin IXB variant increases the risk of celiac disease and points toward a primary intestinal barrier defect. Nat Genet. 2005;37:1341–4. doi: 10.1038/ng1680.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1680) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16282976/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=Myosin%20IXB%20variant%20increases%20the%20risk%20of%20celiac%20disease%20and%20points%20toward%20a%20primary%20intestinal%20barrier%20defect&author=AJ%20Monsuur&volume=37&publication_year=2005&pages=1341-4&pmid=16282976&doi=10.1038/ng1680&)

14. Chadha S, et al. Haplotype analysis of tumour necrosis factor receptor genes in 1p36: no evidence for association with systemic lupus erythematosus. Eur J Hum Genet. 2006;14:69–78. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201527.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201527) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16306881/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20J%20Hum%20Genet&title=Haplotype%20analysis%20of%20tumour%20necrosis%20factor%20receptor%20genes%20in%201p36:%20no%20evidence%20for%20association%20with%20systemic%20lupus%20erythematosus&author=S%20Chadha&volume=14&publication_year=2006&pages=69-78&pmid=16306881&doi=10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201527&)

15. Vader W, et al. The HLA-DQ2 gene dose effect in celiac disease is directly related to the magnitude and breadth of gluten-specific T cell responses. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003;100:12390–5. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2135229100.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2135229100) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC218768/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14530392/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20U%20S%20A&title=The%20HLA-DQ2%20gene%20dose%20effect%20in%20celiac%20disease%20is%20directly%20related%20to%20the%20magnitude%20and%20breadth%20of%20gluten-specific%20T%20cell%20responses&author=W%20Vader&volume=100&publication_year=2003&pages=12390-5&pmid=14530392&doi=10.1073/pnas.2135229100&)

16. Graham RR, et al. Visualizing human leukocyte antigen class II risk haplotypes in human systemic lupus erythematosus. Am J Hum Genet. 2002;71:543–53. doi: 10.1086/342290.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/342290) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC379191/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12145745/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Hum%20Genet&title=Visualizing%20human%20leukocyte%20antigen%20class%20II%20risk%20haplotypes%20in%20human%20systemic%20lupus%20erythematosus&author=RR%20Graham&volume=71&publication_year=2002&pages=543-53&pmid=12145745&doi=10.1086/342290&)

17. Marsh SG. Nomenclature for factors of the HLA system, update June 2005. Tissue Antigens. 2005;66:338–40. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.2005.00479.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-0039.2005.00479.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16185337/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Tissue%20Antigens&title=Nomenclature%20for%20factors%20of%20the%20HLA%20system,%20update%20June%202005&author=SG%20Marsh&volume=66&publication_year=2005&pages=338-40&pmid=16185337&doi=10.1111/j.1399-0039.2005.00479.x&)

18. Klein J. Origin of major histocompatibility complex polymorphism: the trans-species hypothesis. Hum Immunol. 1987;19:155–62. doi: 10.1016/0198-8859(87)90066-8.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0198-8859(87)90066-8) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3305436/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hum%20Immunol&title=Origin%20of%20major%20histocompatibility%20complex%20polymorphism:%20the%20trans-species%20hypothesis&author=J%20Klein&volume=19&publication_year=1987&pages=155-62&pmid=3305436&doi=10.1016/0198-8859(87)90066-8&)

19. Raymond CK, et al. Ancient haplotypes of the HLA Class II region. Genome Res. 2005;15:1250–7. doi: 10.1101/gr.3554305.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.3554305) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1199539/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16140993/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Res&title=Ancient%20haplotypes%20of%20the%20HLA%20Class%20II%20region&author=CK%20Raymond&volume=15&publication_year=2005&pages=1250-7&pmid=16140993&doi=10.1101/gr.3554305&)

20. Traherne JA, et al. Genetic Analysis of Completely Sequenced Disease-Associated MHC Haplotypes Identifies Shuffling of Segments in Recent Human History. PLoS Genet. 2006;2:e9. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0020009.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.0020009) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1331980/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16440057/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Genet&title=Genetic%20Analysis%20of%20Completely%20Sequenced%20Disease-Associated%20MHC%20Haplotypes%20Identifies%20Shuffling%20of%20Segments%20in%20Recent%20Human%20History&author=JA%20Traherne&volume=2&publication_year=2006&pages=e9&pmid=16440057&doi=10.1371/journal.pgen.0020009&)

21. Froeschke G, Sommer S. MHC class II DRB variability and parasite load in the striped mouse (Rhabdomys pumilio) in the Southern Kalahari. Mol Biol Evol. 2005;22:1254–9. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msi112.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msi112) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15703235/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Biol%20Evol&title=MHC%20class%20II%20DRB%20variability%20and%20parasite%20load%20in%20the%20striped%20mouse%20(Rhabdomys%20pumilio)%20in%20the%20Southern%20Kalahari&author=G%20Froeschke&author=S%20Sommer&volume=22&publication_year=2005&pages=1254-9&pmid=15703235&doi=10.1093/molbev/msi112&)

22. Sabeti PC, et al. Detecting recent positive selection in the human genome from haplotype structure. Nature. 2002;419:832–7. doi: 10.1038/nature01140.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature01140) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12397357/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=Detecting%20recent%20positive%20selection%20in%20the%20human%20genome%20from%20haplotype%20structure&author=PC%20Sabeti&volume=419&publication_year=2002&pages=832-7&pmid=12397357&doi=10.1038/nature01140&)

23. Hirschhorn JN, Daly MJ. Genome-wide association studies for common diseases and complex traits. Nat Rev Genet. 2005;6:95–108. doi: 10.1038/nrg1521.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg1521) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15716906/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Rev%20Genet&title=Genome-wide%20association%20studies%20for%20common%20diseases%20and%20complex%20traits&author=JN%20Hirschhorn&author=MJ%20Daly&volume=6&publication_year=2005&pages=95-108&pmid=15716906&doi=10.1038/nrg1521&)

24. Wang WY, Barratt BJ, Clayton DG, Todd JA. Genome-wide association studies: theoretical and practical concerns. Nat Rev Genet. 2005;6:109–18. doi: 10.1038/nrg1522.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg1522) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15716907/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Rev%20Genet&title=Genome-wide%20association%20studies:%20theoretical%20and%20practical%20concerns&author=WY%20Wang&author=BJ%20Barratt&author=DG%20Clayton&author=JA%20Todd&volume=6&publication_year=2005&pages=109-18&pmid=15716907&doi=10.1038/nrg1522&)

25. Petersdorf EW, Malkki M. Human leukocyte antigen matching in unrelated donor hematopoietic cell transplantation. Semin Hematol. 2005;42:76–84. doi: 10.1053/j.seminhematol.2005.01.009.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.seminhematol.2005.01.009) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15846573/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Semin%20Hematol&title=Human%20leukocyte%20antigen%20matching%20in%20unrelated%20donor%20hematopoietic%20cell%20transplantation&author=EW%20Petersdorf&author=M%20Malkki&volume=42&publication_year=2005&pages=76-84&pmid=15846573&doi=10.1053/j.seminhematol.2005.01.009&)

26. Hill WG RA. Linkage disequilibrium in finite populations. Theor.Appl.Genet. 1968;38:226–231. doi: 10.1007/BF01245622.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01245622) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24442307/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Theor.Appl.Genet&title=Linkage%20disequilibrium%20in%20finite%20populations&author=RA%20Hill%20WG&volume=38&publication_year=1968&pages=226-231&pmid=24442307&doi=10.1007/BF01245622&)

27. The International HapMap Consortium A haplotype map of the human genome. Nature. 2005;437:1299–320. doi: 10.1038/nature04226.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature04226) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1880871/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16255080/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=A%20haplotype%20map%20of%20the%20human%20genome&volume=437&publication_year=2005&pages=1299-320&pmid=16255080&doi=10.1038/nature04226&)

28. McVean GA, et al. The fine-scale structure of recombination rate variation in the human genome. Science. 2004;304:581–4. doi: 10.1126/science.1092500.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1092500) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15105499/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=The%20fine-scale%20structure%20of%20recombination%20rate%20variation%20in%20the%20human%20genome&author=GA%20McVean&volume=304&publication_year=2004&pages=581-4&pmid=15105499&doi=10.1126/science.1092500&)

29. Myers S, Bottolo L, Freeman C, McVean G, Donnelly P. A fine-scale map of recombination rates and hotspots across the human genome. Science. 2005;310:321–4. doi: 10.1126/science.1117196.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1117196) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16224025/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=A%20fine-scale%20map%20of%20recombination%20rates%20and%20hotspots%20across%20the%20human%20genome&author=S%20Myers&author=L%20Bottolo&author=C%20Freeman&author=G%20McVean&author=P%20Donnelly&volume=310&publication_year=2005&pages=321-4&pmid=16224025&doi=10.1126/science.1117196&)

30. Nei M, editor. Molecular evolutionary genetics. Columbia University Press; New York: 1987.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Molecular%20evolutionary%20genetics&publication_year=1987&)

31. Voight BF, Kudaravalli S, Wen X, Pritchard JK. A map of recent positive selection in the human genome. PLoS Biol. 2006;4:e72. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040072.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0040072) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1382018/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16494531/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Biol&title=A%20map%20of%20recent%20positive%20selection%20in%20the%20human%20genome&author=BF%20Voight&author=S%20Kudaravalli&author=X%20Wen&author=JK%20Pritchard&volume=4&publication_year=2006&pages=e72&pmid=16494531&doi=10.1371/journal.pbio.0040072&)

32. Fry B. Thesis. Massachusetts Institute of Technology; 2005. Computational Information Design.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Thesis&author=B%20Fry&publication_year=2005&)

33. Kong A, et al. A high-resolution recombination map of the human genome. Nat Genet. 2002;31:241–7. doi: 10.1038/ng917.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng917) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12053178/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=A%20high-resolution%20recombination%20map%20of%20the%20human%20genome&author=A%20Kong&volume=31&publication_year=2002&pages=241-7&pmid=12053178&doi=10.1038/ng917&)
