# CYP2D6 genotypes, endoxifen levels, and disease recurrence in 224 Filipino and Vietnamese women receiving adjuvant tamoxifen for operable breast cancer.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Richard R Love, Zuerenesay Desta, David Flockhart, Todd Skaar, Evan T Ogburn, Anuradha Ramamoorthy, Gemma B Uy, Adriano V Laudico, Nguyen Van Dinh, Le Hong Quang, Ta Van To, Gregory S Young, Erinn Hade, David Jarjoura
**Journal:** SpringerPlus
**Year:** 2013
**PMID:** 23476897

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** While tamoxifen activity is mainly due to endoxifen and the concentration of this active metabolite is, in part, controlled by CYP2D6 metabolic status, clinical correlative studies have produced mixed results.

**FINDINGS:** In an exploratory study, we determined the CYP2D6 metabolic status and plasma concentrations of endoxifen among 224 Filipino and Vietnamese women participating in a clinical trial of adjuvant hormonal therapy for operable breast cancer. We further conducted a nested-case-control study among 48 women (half with recurrent disease, half without) investigating the relationship of endoxifen concentrations and recurrence of disease. We found a significant association of reduced endoxifen plasma concentrations with functionally important CYP2D6 genotypes. High endoxifen concentrations were associated with higher risk of recurrence; with a quadratic trend fitted to a stratified Cox proportional hazards regression model, the likelihood ratio p-value was 0.002. The trend also showed that in 8 out of 9 pairs with low endoxifen concentrations, the recurrent case had lower endoxifen levels than the matched control.

**CONCLUSIONS:** This exploratory analysis suggests that there is an optimal range for endoxifen concentrations to achieve favorable effects as adjuvant therapy. In particular, at higher concentrations (>70 ng.ml), endoxifen may promote recurrence.
