# Determination of novel CYP2D6 haplotype using the targeted sequencing followed by the long-read sequencing and the functional characterization in the Japanese population.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Koya Fukunaga, Eiji Hishinuma, Masahiro Hiratsuka, Ken Kato, Takuji Okusaka, Takeo Saito, Masashi Ikeda, Teruhiko Yoshida, Hitoshi Zembutsu, Nakao Iwata, Taisei Mushiroda
**Journal:** Journal of human genetics
**Year:** 2021
**PMID:** 32759992

## Abstract

Next-generation sequencing (NGS) has identified variations in cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6 associated with drug responses. However, determination of novel haplotypes is difficult because of the short reads generated by NGS. We aimed to identify novel CYP2D6 variants in the Japanese population and predict the CYP2D6 phenotype based on in vitro metabolic studies. Using a targeted NGS panel (PKSeq), 990 Japanese genomes were sequenced, and then novel CYP2D6 haplotypes were determined. Km, Vmax, and intrinsic clearance (Vmax/Km) of N-desmethyl-tamoxifen 4-hydroxylation were calculated by in vitro metabolic studies using cDNA-expressed CYP2D6 proteins. After determination of the CYP2D6 diplotypes, phenotypes of the individuals were predicted based on the in vitro metabolic activities. Targeted NGS identified 14 CYP2D6 variants not registered in the Pharmacogene Variation Consortium (PharmVar) database. Ten novel haplotypes were registered as CYP2D6*128 to *137 alleles in the PharmVar database. Based on the Vmax/Km value of each allele, *128, *129, *130, *131, *132, and *133 were predicted to be nonfunctional alleles. According to the results of the present study, six normal metabolizers (NM) and one intermediate (IM) metabolizers were designated as IM and poor metabolizers (PM), respectively. Our findings provide important insights into novel haplotypes and haplotypes of CYP2D6 and the effects on in vitro metabolic activities.
