# Genetic Variants of Cytochrome CYP2D6 in Two Mixed Chilean Populations.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Mónica Acuña, Eric Pinto, Paulina Olivares, Carolina Ríos
**Journal:** Human heredity
**Year:** 2016
**PMID:** 28728153

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVES:** It is known that the interindividual and interethnic variability of the genetic polymorphisms of CYP2D6 plays an important role in the presentation of adverse drug reactions and concerning lack of therapeutic effects in humans. However, there are few data available from mixed populations of Latin America, including the Chilean. The aim of this study was therefore to estimate the frequencies of CYP2D6 variants in two samples of hospitals from the northern (Hospital San José, HSJ) and eastern (Clínica Las Condes, CLC) parts of Santiago, Chile, with different degrees of Amerindian admixture (HSJ: 34.5%; CLC: 15.9%).

**METHODS:** We used polymerase chain reaction followed by restriction endonuclease digestion (PCR-RFLP) to genotype 7 CYP2D6 alleles in 250 healthy unrelated individuals of Chilean Mestizo background. The detection of allele CYP2D6*5 and the duplication of this gene was performed by long-PCR.

**RESULTS:** The degrees of Amerindian admixture are reflected in the observed frequencies of the CYP2D6*1 (HSJ: 58.26%; CLC: 41.06%), CYP2D6*2 (HSJ: 28.10%; CLC: 40.65%), and CYP2D6*4 (HSJ: 8.26%; CLC: 12.60%) alleles; the frequencies of CYP2D6*1 (p = 0.0002) and CYP2D6*2 (p = 0.0036) are significantly different between the samples. Four individuals (CLC: 0.41%; HSJ: 1.24%) could not be assigned to a genotype. We identified 3.25% of the genotypes which predict a poor metabolizer phenotype in CLC and 1.65% in HSJ.

**CONCLUSION:** Our data indicate ethnic group-dependent genetic differences in the vulnerability to treatment with the large variety of drugs metabolized by the enzyme CYP2D6.
