# Genetic association of phase I and phase II detoxification genes with recurrent miscarriages among North Indian women.

## Metadata
**Authors:** F Parveen, R M Faridi, V Das, G Tripathi, S Agrawal
**Journal:** Molecular human reproduction
**Year:** 2010
**PMID:** 19892789

## Abstract

Allelic variants of the detoxification genes that have impaired biotransformation functions may increase susceptibility to reproductive toxicity leading to endometriosis, recurrent miscarriage (RM) or poor pregnancy outcome. In the present study, we have investigated CYP1A1, CYP2D6, GSTT1, GSTP1 and GSTM1, which are involved in the phase I and phase II detoxification systems, in relation to their role in the etiology of unexplained RMs. In a case-control study, we have investigated 200 females with RM and 300 age and ethnically matched healthy controls with successful reproductive history from North India. The frequencies of phase I wild-type genotypes of CYP1A1 and CYP2D6 in RM cases were 0.56 and 0.60, whereas in controls these were 0.68 and 0.65, respectively (both P < 0.05). The GSTM1 null-genotype frequencies were 0.66 and 0.84 among RM cases and controls, respectively, the GSTT1 null-genotype frequencies were 0.52 and 0.45 (P < 0.005) and the GSTP1 variant allele frequencies were 0.23 and 0.20, respectively. In conclusion, we observed significant protective effects of phase I wild-type genotypes and association of the GSTT1 null genotype with RM. Through combined analyses we have highlighted the importance of the balance of phase I/phase II detoxification systems, in the etiology of RM.
