# Single-step assays to analyze CYP2D6 gene polymorphisms in Asians: allele frequencies and a novel *14B allele in mainland Chinese.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Ling Ji, Shixiu Pan, Jacqueline Marti-Jaun, Edgar Hänseler, Katharina Rentsch, Martin Hersberger
**Journal:** Clinical chemistry
**Year:** 2002
**PMID:** 12089164

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** Cytochrome P450-dependent monooxygenase 2D6 (CYP2D6) activity can be estimated by investigating the metabolism of model drugs or by genotyping the most common CYP2D6 alleles. For Caucasians, the CYP2D6 allele frequencies are well investigated, and single-step assays are available for genotyping, whereas allele analysis in mainland Chinese is limited.

**METHODS:** Two tetra-primer assays and one allele-specific amplification assay were developed to easily genotype the CYP2D6 alleles *8, *10, and *14 previously detected in Asians. Applying these assays in combination with established single-tube assays, we analyzed 223 DNA samples from Chinese volunteers for the CYP2D6 alleles *3, *4, *5, *6, *8, *10, and *14 and for duplication of CYP2D6.

**RESULTS:** Six different alleles were detected in mainland Chinese. The most frequent mutant allele was the intermediate metabolizer allele, CYP2D6*10, with a prevalence of 51.3%, followed by the poor metabolizer alleles CYP2D6*5 (7.2%) and a novel variant of CYP2D6*14. This novel *14B allele (2.0%) differs from the *14 allele by the absence of the C188T substitution and by the additional G1749C substitution. Furthermore, six duplication alleles of CYP2D6 were detected, including one duplication of the *10 allele (*10X2).

**CONCLUSIONS:** The CYP2D6 allele frequencies in mainland Chinese shows some genetic diversity compared with Chinese from other regions: a novel *14B allele, a slightly higher frequency of the *5 allele, and a slightly lower frequency of the *10 allele than in most other Chinese populations.
