# CYP2D6 extensive, intermediate, and poor phenotypes and genotypes in a Polish population.

## Metadata
**Authors:** P Niewinski, K Orzechowska-Juzwenko, M Hurkacz, Z Rzemislawska, E Jaźwinska-Tarnawska, P Milejski, Z Forkasiewicz
**Journal:** European journal of clinical pharmacology
**Year:** 2002
**PMID:** 12536989

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVE:** This study investigated the distribution of the CYP2D6 genotypes and phenotypes in a Polish population and compared the concordance of the two methods.

**METHODS:** Six hundred unrelated healthy individuals from southwestern Poland were studied. The CYP2D6 phenotype was analyzed in 300 individuals using sparteine as a model drug. The CYP2D6 genotype was analyzed in 300 individuals by polymerase chain reaction amplification and restriction fragment length polymorphism techniques for the CYP2D6*1, CYP2D6*3, and CYP2D6*4 alleles. Additionally, in 60 randomly selected healthy individuals both the CYP2D6 phenotype and genotype was assessed to determine accordance between the methods.

**RESULTS:** Of 300 participants in the study 25 (8.3%) were classified as poor metabolizers, 44 (14.7%) as intermediate metabolizers, and 231 (77%) as extensive metabolizers of sparteine. The frequency of CYP2D6*1, CYP2D6*3, and CYP2D6*4 alleles among the genotyped 300 persons was 75.7%, 1.3%, and 23.0%, respectively. The frequency of CYP2D6 deficient genotypes in a Polish population (8.0%) was similar to phenotyping results. The comparison of phenotype and genotype in 60 randomly selected individuals showed a good concordance of the obtained results. CONCLUSIONS. The frequencies of poor metabolizers for CYP2D6 phenotype (8.3%) and genotype (8.0%) in a Polish population from the southwestern region are in concordance and compare well with most results of poor oxidation metabolizers in other white populations.
