# Variation in the glucose transporter gene SLC2A2 is associated with glycemic response to metformin

## Metadata
**Authors:** Kaixin Zhou, Sook Wah Yee, Eric L Seiser, Nienke van Leeuwen, Roger Tavendale, Amanda J Bennett, Christopher J Groves, Ruth L Coleman, Amber A van der Heijden, Joline W Beulens, Catherine E de Keyser, Linda Zaharenko, Daniel M Rotroff, Mattijs Out, Kathleen A Jablonski, Ling Chen, Martin Javorský, Jozef Židzik, Albert M Levin, L Keoki Williams, Tanja Dujic, Sabina Semiz, Michiaki Kubo, Huan-Chieh Chien, Shiro Maeda, John S Witte, Longyang Wu, Ivan Tkáč, Adriaan Kooy, Ron H N van Schaik, Coen D A Stehouwer, Lisa Logie, MetGen Investigators, DPP Investigators, ACCORD Investigators, Calum Sutherland, Janis Klovins, Valdis Pirags, Albert Hofman, Bruno H Stricker, Alison A Motsinger-Reif, Michael J Wagner, Federico Innocenti, Leen M 't Hart, Rury R Holman, Mark I McCarthy, Monique M Hedderson, Colin N A Palmer, Jose C Florez, Kathleen M Giacomini, Ewan R Pearson
**Journal:** Nature genetics
**Date:** 2016 Aug 8
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.3632](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3632)
**PMID:** 27500523
**PMCID:** PMC5007158
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5007158/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5007158/pdf/nihms-812224.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5007158/pdf/nihms-812224.pdf)

## Abstract

Metformin is the first-line antidiabetic drug with over 100 million users worldwide, yet its mechanism of action remains unclear1. Here the Metformin Genetics (MetGen) Consortium reports a three-stage genome-wide association study (GWAS), consisting of 13,123 participants of different ancestries. The C allele of rs8192675 in the intron of SLC2A2, which encodes the facilitated glucose transporter GLUT2, was associated with a 0.17% (p=6.6×10−14) greater metformin-induced in haemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) in 10,577 participants of European ancestry. rs8192675 is the top cis expression quantitative trait locus (cis-eQTL) for SLC2A2 in 1,226 human liver samples, suggesting a key role for hepatic GLUT2 in regulation of metformin action. Among obese individuals, C-allele homozygotes at rs8192675 had a 0.33% (3.6 mmol/mol) greater absolute HbA1c reduction than T-allele homozygotes. This was about half the effect seen with the addition of a DPP-4 inhibitor, and equated to a dose difference of 550mg of metformin, suggesting rs8192675 as a potential biomarker for stratified medicine.

## METHODS

### Data access

The three liver eQTL data sets published previously are available with Gene Expression Ombibus (GEO) accession numbers: [GSE39036](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE39036), [GSE25935](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE25935) and [GSE9588](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE9588).

### Studies and Samples

Both GWAS screening and the first-stage replication analyzed participants with type 2 diabetes of European ancestry from the GoDARTS cohort. The current GWAS screening used 1,373 participants, which included data from 345 samples released after our initial GWAS report on 1,028 participants^12^. The first-stage replication included up to 1,473 samples from the remaining GoDARTS participants depending on the call rate and genotyping assay. The second-stage replication consisted of 1,223 participants of European ancestry from the UKPDS study. The final replication and meta-analysis was conducted within the MetGen Consortium which included an extra 6,488 participants of European ancestry and 2,566 participants of non-European ancestry. Detailed information on the MetGen participants is provided in [Supplementary Table 2](#SD3). Of note, about 50% of the MetGen cohort is from PMT, which represents ethnically diverse U.S. populations. These cohorts were used extensively in our multi-ethnic analysis for replication purposes. Participants from the largest PMT cohort, PMT2, were selected from the Genetic Epidemiology Research on Adult Health and Aging (GERA) cohort, a subsample of the Kaiser Permanente Research Program on Genes, Environment, and Health (RPEGH) ^36^. Three MetGen cohorts, GoDARTS, UKPDS and DCS also provided data on response to sulfonylureas. All human research was approved by the relevant institutional review boards, and all participants provided written informed consent.

### Genotyping and quality control

Genotyping for the GWAS screening and the first-stage CardioMetabochip replication in GoDARTS cohort has been described before by WTCCC2 and DIAGRAM^12,37^. Standard quality control procedures were applied to both data sets to filter SNPs with minor allele frequency (MAF)<1% or call rate <98% or Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE) deviation (p<10^−4^). Samples with call rate <98% or extra heterozygosity (more than 3 standard deviation away from the mean) or correlated with another sample (identity by descent [IBD]>0.125) were filtered out. In-house genotyping of the GoDARTS samples in the first-stage replication were performed with Sequenom MassArray for 66 SNPs and TaqMan based Allelic Discrimination assays for 9 SNPs. Details of the SNP selection procedure is described in [Supplementary Data](#SD1). All 75 SNPs had call rate >90% and no deviation from HWE (p>0.005). The second-stage genotyping of the UKPDS sample was carried out in duplicate runs using standard TaqMan assays. All the SNPs were in HWE (p>0.05) and only samples with concordant genotypes from both runs were analysed. The third-stage replication used high quality genotypes from either TaqMan assay or GWAS imputed data on rs8192675 ([Supplementary Table 2](#SD3)).

### Assessment of glycaemic response to metformin and sulfonylureas

As with our previous GWAS^12^, two correlated measures of glycaemic response to metformin were used in the current GWAS screening and the first-stage replication. A quantitative measure of HbA1c reduction (baseline minus on-treatment HbA1c) and a categorical measure of whether achieving a target of treatment HbA1c≤7% were used for genetic association tests. Therefore only participants with type 2 diabetes and a baseline HbA1c>7% were included. Baseline HbA1c was measured within 6 months prior to metformin start whilst on-treatment HbA1c was taken as the minimum achieved within 18 months after metformin start.

In the second-stage replication and the meta-analysis in the third-stage replication, we opted to maximize the sample size by synchronizing the measurement of metformin efficacy in a wider spectrum of participants with type 2 diabetes (including those with baseline HbA1c<7%) across the MetGen. Therefore only the quantitative outcome of HbA1c reduction was used to assess the glycaemic response to metformin. To maintain relative clinical homogeneity, only participants with type 2 diabetes on metformin monotherapy or using metformin as an add-on therapy to another oral agent were included.

Data from two MetGen cohorts, which used alternative measures of glycaemic response, were not included in the current meta-analyses, but the results are shown in [Supplementary Table 4](#SD3). In the DPP cohort of pre-diabetes participants, Cox proportional hazards regression was used to evaluate the genetic impact on the time to diabetes incidence^8^. In the HOME cohort, a multiple linear regression was used to test the genetic association with the difference in daily dose of insulin because metformin was used in conjunction with insulin in these participants^38^.

Assessment of glycaemic response to sulfonylureas adopted a similar approach as the quantitative outcome of metformin response in the MetGen. Baseline HbA1c and on-treatment HbA1c were captured in a similar manner as those in defining metformin response. Only participants with type 2 diabetes who were on sulfonylureas monotherapy or using sulfonylureas as an add-on therapy to metformin were included. All participants had a baseline HbA1c>7%.

### Statistical Analysis

In the GWAS screening and first-stage replication, each SNP was tested for association with the continuous measure and categorical measure of glycaemic response to metformin separately with PLINK software using linear and logistic regression respectively^39^. Baseline HbA1c, adherence, metformin dose, creatinine clearance and treatment scheme (whether on metformin monotherapy or dual therapy of metformin add-on to sulfonylureas) and the first 10 principle component from EIGENSTRAT were used as covariates^40^. Statistical evidence of the two associations at each SNP was averaged by taking the geometric mean of the two p-values in cases in which the direction of effect was consistent (for example more HbA1c reduction and more likely to achieve the treatment target both indicate better response).

In the second and third stage replications, association with HbA1c reduction was tested with multiple linear regression. Within each cohort, two linear models were fitted either with or without adjustment for baseline HbA1c. Baseline HbA1c has been shown as the strongest predictor of metformin induced HbA1c reduction in pharmaco-epidemiological studies^41^. Adjusting for baseline HbA1c could reduce the confounding of measurement error in baseline HbA1c and increase the statistical power for pharmacogenetic studies^42^. However, if a variant is associated with baseline HbA1c, adjusting for baseline HbA1c would lead to a reduced estimate of its pharmacogenetic effect compared to a model that did not adjust for the baseline HbA1c. Therefore we presented both models in the current study. Other clinical factors such as creatinine clearance (or other measurement of kidney function) and treatment scheme were included as covariates where available ([Supplementary Table 2](#SD3)). Combining the association results from individual cohort was conducted by a fixed-effect inverse-variance–weighted meta-analysis as applied in GWAMA^43^. Cochran's heterogeneity statistic's p-value was reported as *P*_het_.

For the genetic association tests with response to sulfonylureas, multiple linear regression was used to assess the association between rs8192675 and baseline HbA1c, on-treatment HbA1c, HbA1c reduction and baseline adjusted HbA1c reduction. Treatment scheme (whether on sulfonylureas monotherapy or using sulfonylureas as add-on treatment to metformin) was included as a covariate when modelling sulfonylureas induced HbA1c reduction. Association test results from the three cohorts were combined with fixed-effect inverse-variance–weighted meta-analysis in GWAMA.

Locus-wise association was performed with GWAS imputed data of 7,223 participants available in the GoDARTS and PMT2-EU. Software IMPUTE2 was used to impute the post quality control GWAS data at 1Mb flank of rs8192675 against the 1000 Genomes reference panel^44^. Only SNPs with high imputation quality (info>0.9 and MAF>0.02) in both cohorts were tested for association with SNPTEST ^45^. Summary statistics from GoDARTS and PMT2-EU were combined with fixed-effect inverse-variance–weighted meta-analysis in GWAMA.

To evaluate the translational potential of rs8192675, we derived an unbiased estimate of its allelic effect by excluding the discovery cohort in the meta-analysis. This effect size was aligned to the clinical impact observed in the PMT2-EU which was the biggest replication cohort and used the median average daily dose in the MetGen. The average daily dose and dosing impact in PMT2-EU were 962mg/day and an extra 0.6% HbA1c reduction per gram metformin respectively. The evaluation of rs8192675 genotype by BMI group interaction was performed with linear regression by adjusting for treatment group, sex and study cohort.

### Expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) analyses

We used four liver eQTL datasets comprising a total number of 1,226 livers samples from individuals of European ancestry ([Supplementary Table 8](#SD3)). Tissue procurement, gene expression analysis, genotyping and eQTL analyses have been described previously for three of the datasets^46-48^. The fourth data set was contributed by E. Schadt (E. Schadt, C. Molony, E. Chudin, K. Hao, X. Yang *et al.*, personal communication). Genotypes were imputed to the 1000 Genome reference panel with IMPUTE2. Expression probe sequences were mapped to ENSEMBL genes and only the common genes across all datasets were included for subsequent analyses. Within each dataset, the genome-wide eQTL analysis was run with an additive genetic model including dataset specific covariates to examine *cis*-associations within a 100kb flanking window. Results from the four datasets were then combined with a modified meta test statistic which was calculated using the following approach: t_meta_=(Σw_i_t_i_)/√(Σw_i_^2^), w=√(*n*−(#*cov*ariates)−1) where i=data sets 1-4 and n=sample size^49^. This method Generation of p-values was accomplished by assuming the meta test statistics were normally distributed; a Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction was applied to the p-values. For the current study, we extended the cis-association tests to all SNPs within 1Mb window of *SLC2A2* and report the locus-wise p-values of the meta test statistic.

We investigated whether rs8192675 is a cis-QTL in other tissues in the GTEx data release V6. Due to the sample size limitation, rs8192675 is not a genomewide significant cis-eQTL for SLC2A2 in any of tissues examined. However, given the strong evidence of the variant being a cis-eQTL in the large liver samples reported in this study, we considered a directionally consistent association with p<0.05 as supportive evidence. The eQTL data for islet and intestine were acquired through contacting the authors of the original publications^21,22^. The eQTL data for kidney were obtained by quantitative real-time PCR of 44 kidney samples genotyped with the Affymetrix Axiom array. Sample acquirement and tissue preparation was described previously^50^. The transcript levels of *SLC2A2* were determined using TaqMan probe (ID Hs01096908_m1). The relative expression level of *SLC2A2* transcript was calculated by the comparative method (ΔΔCt) normalized to the housekeeping gene GAPDH, as described previously^51^.

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgement

We acknowledge G.I. Bell (University of Chicago) for providing the expression vector for SLC2A2 (pSP64T-SLC2A2), and D.L. Minor and F. Findeisen for their guidance in performing oocyte injection and preparing cRNA. For full acknowledgments, see the **Supplementary Note**.

## Footnotes

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Supplementary Materials

### Supplementary Materials

## References

1. Madiraju AK, et al. Metformin suppresses gluconeogenesis by inhibiting mitochondrial glycerophosphate dehydrogenase. Nature. 2014;510:542–546. doi: 10.1038/nature13270.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13270) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4074244/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24847880/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=Metformin%20suppresses%20gluconeogenesis%20by%20inhibiting%20mitochondrial%20glycerophosphate%20dehydrogenase.&author=AK%20Madiraju&volume=510&publication_year=2014&pages=542-546&pmid=24847880&doi=10.1038/nature13270&)

2. DeFronzo RA, Goodman AM. Efficacy of metformin in patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. N. Engl. J. Med. 1995;333:541–549. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199508313330902.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM199508313330902) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7623902/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N.%20Engl.%20J.%20Med&title=Efficacy%20of%20metformin%20in%20patients%20with%20non-insulin-dependent%20diabetes%20mellitus.&author=RA%20DeFronzo&author=AM%20Goodman&volume=333&publication_year=1995&pages=541-549&pmid=7623902&doi=10.1056/NEJM199508313330902&)

3. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group Effect of intensive blood-glucose control with metformin on complications in overweight patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 34). Lancet. 1998;352:854–865.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9742977/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Lancet&title=Effect%20of%20intensive%20blood-glucose%20control%20with%20metformin%20on%20complications%20in%20overweight%20patients%20with%20type%202%20diabetes%20(UKPDS%2034).&volume=352&publication_year=1998&pages=854-865&pmid=9742977&)

4. Zhou K, et al. Heritability of variation in glycaemic response to metformin: a genome-wide complex trait analysis. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2014;2:481–487. doi: 10.1016/S2213-8587(14)70050-6.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(14)70050-6) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4038749/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24731673/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Lancet%20Diabetes%20Endocrinol&title=Heritability%20of%20variation%20in%20glycaemic%20response%20to%20metformin:%20a%20genome-wide%20complex%20trait%20analysis.&author=K%20Zhou&volume=2&publication_year=2014&pages=481-487&pmid=24731673&doi=10.1016/S2213-8587(14)70050-6&)

5. Pawlyk AC, Giacomini KM, McKeon C, Shuldiner AR, Florez JC. Metformin pharmacogenomics: current status and future directions. Diabetes. 2014;63:2590–2599. doi: 10.2337/db13-1367.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/db13-1367) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4113063/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25060887/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes&title=Metformin%20pharmacogenomics:%20current%20status%20and%20future%20directions.&author=AC%20Pawlyk&author=KM%20Giacomini&author=C%20McKeon&author=AR%20Shuldiner&author=JC%20Florez&volume=63&publication_year=2014&pages=2590-2599&pmid=25060887&doi=10.2337/db13-1367&)

6. Tkáč I, et al. Pharmacogenomic association between a variant in SLC47A1 gene and therapeutic response to metformin in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Obes. Metab. 2013;15:189–191. doi: 10.1111/j.1463-1326.2012.01691.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1463-1326.2012.01691.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22882994/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes%20Obes.%20Metab&title=Pharmacogenomic%20association%20between%20a%20variant%20in%20SLC47A1%20gene%20and%20therapeutic%20response%20to%20metformin%20in%20type%202%20diabetes.&author=I%20Tk%C3%A1%C4%8D&volume=15&publication_year=2013&pages=189-191&pmid=22882994&doi=10.1111/j.1463-1326.2012.01691.x&)

7. Stocker SL, et al. The effect of novel promoter variants in MATE1 and MATE2 on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of metformin. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 2013;93:186–194. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2012.210.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/clpt.2012.210) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3671611/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23267855/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin.%20Pharmacol.%20Ther&title=The%20effect%20of%20novel%20promoter%20variants%20in%20MATE1%20and%20MATE2%20on%20the%20pharmacokinetics%20and%20pharmacodynamics%20of%20metformin.&author=SL%20Stocker&volume=93&publication_year=2013&pages=186-194&pmid=23267855&doi=10.1038/clpt.2012.210&)

8. Jablonski KA, et al. Common variants in 40 genes assessed for diabetes incidence and response to metformin and lifestyle intervention in the diabetes prevention program. Diabetes. 2010;59:2672–2681. doi: 10.2337/db10-0543.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/db10-0543) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3279522/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20682687/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes&title=Common%20variants%20in%2040%20genes%20assessed%20for%20diabetes%20incidence%20and%20response%20to%20metformin%20and%20lifestyle%20intervention%20in%20the%20diabetes%20prevention%20program.&author=KA%20Jablonski&volume=59&publication_year=2010&pages=2672-2681&pmid=20682687&doi=10.2337/db10-0543&)

9. Shu Y, et al. Effect of genetic variation in the organic cation transporter 1, OCT1, on metformin pharmacokinetics. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 2008;83:273–280. doi: 10.1038/sj.clpt.6100275.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.clpt.6100275) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2976713/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17609683/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin.%20Pharmacol.%20Ther&title=Effect%20of%20genetic%20variation%20in%20the%20organic%20cation%20transporter%201,%20OCT1,%20on%20metformin%20pharmacokinetics.&author=Y%20Shu&volume=83&publication_year=2008&pages=273-280&pmid=17609683&doi=10.1038/sj.clpt.6100275&)

10. Zhou K, et al. Reduced-function SLC22A1 polymorphisms encoding organic cation transporter 1 and glycemic response to metformin: a GoDARTS study. Diabetes. 2009;58:1434–1439. doi: 10.2337/db08-0896.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/db08-0896) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2682689/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19336679/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes&title=Reduced-function%20SLC22A1%20polymorphisms%20encoding%20organic%20cation%20transporter%201%20and%20glycemic%20response%20to%20metformin:%20a%20GoDARTS%20study.&author=K%20Zhou&volume=58&publication_year=2009&pages=1434-1439&pmid=19336679&doi=10.2337/db08-0896&)

11. van Leeuwen N, et al. A gene variant near ATM is significantly associated with metformin treatment response in type 2 diabetes: a replication and meta-analysis of five cohorts. Diabetologia. 2012;55:1971–1977. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2537-x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-012-2537-x) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3369131/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22453232/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetologia&title=A%20gene%20variant%20near%20ATM%20is%20significantly%20associated%20with%20metformin%20treatment%20response%20in%20type%202%20diabetes:%20a%20replication%20and%20meta-analysis%20of%20five%20cohorts.&author=N%20van%20Leeuwen&volume=55&publication_year=2012&pages=1971-1977&pmid=22453232&doi=10.1007/s00125-012-2537-x&)

12. GoDARTS and UKPDS Diabetes Pharmacogenetics Study Group Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium 2 & MAGIC investigators. Common variants near ATM are associated with glycemic response to metformin in type 2 diabetes. Nat. Genet. 2011;43:117–120. doi: 10.1038/ng.735.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.735) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3030919/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21186350/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Genet&title=Wellcome%20Trust%20Case%20Control%20Consortium%202%20&%20MAGIC%20investigators.%20Common%20variants%20near%20ATM%20are%20associated%20with%20glycemic%20response%20to%20metformin%20in%20type%202%20diabetes.&volume=43&publication_year=2011&pages=117-120&pmid=21186350&doi=10.1038/ng.735&)

13. Zhou K, et al. Loss-of-function CYP2C9 variants improve therapeutic response to sulfonylureas in type 2 diabetes: a Go-DARTS study. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 2010;87:52–56. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2009.176.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/clpt.2009.176) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19794412/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin.%20Pharmacol.%20Ther&title=Loss-of-function%20CYP2C9%20variants%20improve%20therapeutic%20response%20to%20sulfonylureas%20in%20type%202%20diabetes:%20a%20Go-DARTS%20study.&author=K%20Zhou&volume=87&publication_year=2010&pages=52-56&pmid=19794412&doi=10.1038/clpt.2009.176&)

14. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group Intensive blood-glucose control with sulphonylureas or insulin compared with conventional treatment and risk of complications in patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 33). Lancet. 1998;352:837–853.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9742976/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Lancet&title=Intensive%20blood-glucose%20control%20with%20sulphonylureas%20or%20insulin%20compared%20with%20conventional%20treatment%20and%20risk%20of%20complications%20in%20patients%20with%20type%202%20diabetes%20(UKPDS%2033).&volume=352&publication_year=1998&pages=837-853&pmid=9742976&)

15. Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group Long-term safety, tolerability, and weight loss associated with metformin in the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study. Diabetes Care. 2012;35:731–737. doi: 10.2337/dc11-1299.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/dc11-1299) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3308305/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22442396/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes%20Care&title=Long-term%20safety,%20tolerability,%20and%20weight%20loss%20associated%20with%20metformin%20in%20the%20Diabetes%20Prevention%20Program%20Outcomes%20Study.&volume=35&publication_year=2012&pages=731-737&pmid=22442396&doi=10.2337/dc11-1299&)

16. Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group 10-year follow-up of diabetes incidence and weight loss in the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study. Lancet. 2009;374:1677–1686. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61457-4.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61457-4) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3135022/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19878986/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Lancet&title=10-year%20follow-up%20of%20diabetes%20incidence%20and%20weight%20loss%20in%20the%20Diabetes%20Prevention%20Program%20Outcomes%20Study.&volume=374&publication_year=2009&pages=1677-1686&pmid=19878986&doi=10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61457-4&)

17. Kahn SE, et al. Glycemic durability of rosiglitazone, metformin, or glyburide monotherapy. N. Engl. J. Med. 2006;355:2427–2443. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa066224.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa066224) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17145742/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N.%20Engl.%20J.%20Med&title=Glycemic%20durability%20of%20rosiglitazone,%20metformin,%20or%20glyburide%20monotherapy.&author=SE%20Kahn&volume=355&publication_year=2006&pages=2427-2443&pmid=17145742&doi=10.1056/NEJMoa066224&)

18. Scott RA, et al. Large-scale association analyses identify new loci influencing glycemic traits and provide insight into the underlying biological pathways. Nat. Genet. 2012;44:991–1005. doi: 10.1038/ng.2385.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2385) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3433394/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22885924/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Genet&title=Large-scale%20association%20analyses%20identify%20new%20loci%20influencing%20glycemic%20traits%20and%20provide%20insight%20into%20the%20underlying%20biological%20pathways.&author=RA%20Scott&volume=44&publication_year=2012&pages=991-1005&pmid=22885924&doi=10.1038/ng.2385&)

19. Soranzo N, et al. Common variants at 10 genomic loci influence hemoglobin AC levels via glycemic and nonglycemic pathways. Diabetes. 2010;59:3229–3239. doi: 10.2337/db10-0502.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/db10-0502) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2992787/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20858683/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes&title=Common%20variants%20at%2010%20genomic%20loci%20influence%20hemoglobin%20AC%20levels%20via%20glycemic%20and%20nonglycemic%20pathways.&author=N%20Soranzo&volume=59&publication_year=2010&pages=3229-3239&pmid=20858683&doi=10.2337/db10-0502&)

20. GTEx Consortium The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) pilot analysis: multitissue gene regulation in humans. Science. 2015;348:648–660. doi: 10.1126/science.1262110.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1262110) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4547484/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25954001/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=The%20Genotype-Tissue%20Expression%20(GTEx)%20pilot%20analysis:%20multitissue%20gene%20regulation%20in%20humans.&volume=348&publication_year=2015&pages=648-660&pmid=25954001&doi=10.1126/science.1262110&)

21. van de Bunt M, et al. Transcript expression data from human islets links regulatory signals from genome-wide association studies for type 2 diabetes and glycemic traits to their downstream effectors. PLoS Genet. 2015;11:e1005694. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005694.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1005694) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4666611/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26624892/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Genet&title=Transcript%20expression%20data%20from%20human%20islets%20links%20regulatory%20signals%20from%20genome-wide%20association%20studies%20for%20type%202%20diabetes%20and%20glycemic%20traits%20to%20their%20downstream%20effectors.&author=M%20van%20de%20Bunt&volume=11&publication_year=2015&pages=e1005694&pmid=26624892&doi=10.1371/journal.pgen.1005694&)

22. Kabakchiev B, Silverberg MS. Expression quantitative trait loci analysis identifies associations between genotype and gene expression in human intestine. Gastroenterology. 2013;144:1488–496. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.03.001.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2013.03.001) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3775712/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23474282/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gastroenterology&title=Expression%20quantitative%20trait%20loci%20analysis%20identifies%20associations%20between%20genotype%20and%20gene%20expression%20in%20human%20intestine.&author=B%20Kabakchiev&author=MS%20Silverberg&volume=144&publication_year=2013&pages=1488-496&pmid=23474282&doi=10.1053/j.gastro.2013.03.001&)

23. Manz F, et al. Fanconi–Bickel syndrome. Pediatr. Nephrol. 1987;1:509–518. doi: 10.1007/BF00849262.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00849262) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3153325/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pediatr.%20Nephrol&title=Fanconi%E2%80%93Bickel%20syndrome.&author=F%20Manz&volume=1&publication_year=1987&pages=509-518&pmid=3153325&doi=10.1007/BF00849262&)

24. Fanconi G, Bickel H. Chronic aminoaciduria (amino acid diabetes or nephrotic glucosuric dwarfism) in glycogen storage and cystine disease. Helv. Paediatr. Acta. 1949;4:359–396.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15397919/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Helv.%20Paediatr.%20Acta&title=Chronic%20aminoaciduria%20(amino%20acid%20diabetes%20or%20nephrotic%20glucosuric%20dwarfism)%20in%20glycogen%20storage%20and%20cystine%20disease.&author=G%20Fanconi&author=H%20Bickel&volume=4&publication_year=1949&pages=359-396&pmid=15397919&)

25. Miller RA, et al. Biguanides suppress hepatic glucagon signalling by decreasing production of cyclic AMP. Nature. 2013;494:256–260. doi: 10.1038/nature11808.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11808) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3573218/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23292513/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=Biguanides%20suppress%20hepatic%20glucagon%20signalling%20by%20decreasing%20production%20of%20cyclic%20AMP.&author=RA%20Miller&volume=494&publication_year=2013&pages=256-260&pmid=23292513&doi=10.1038/nature11808&)

26. Hosokawa M, Thorens B. Glucose release from GLUT2-null hepatocytes: characterization of a major and a minor pathway. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2002;282:E794–E801. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00374.2001.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpendo.00374.2001) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11882499/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Physiol.%20Endocrinol.%20Metab&title=Glucose%20release%20from%20GLUT2-null%20hepatocytes:%20characterization%20of%20a%20major%20and%20a%20minor%20pathway.&author=M%20Hosokawa&author=B%20Thorens&volume=282&publication_year=2002&pages=E794-E801&pmid=11882499&doi=10.1152/ajpendo.00374.2001&)

27. Burcelin R, Dolci W, Thorens B. Glucose sensing by the hepatoportal sensor is GLUT2-dependent: in vivo analysis in GLUT2-null mice. Diabetes. 2000;49:1643–1648. doi: 10.2337/diabetes.49.10.1643.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/diabetes.49.10.1643) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11016447/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes&title=Glucose%20sensing%20by%20the%20hepatoportal%20sensor%20is%20GLUT2-dependent:%20in%20vivo%20analysis%20in%20GLUT2-null%20mice.&author=R%20Burcelin&author=W%20Dolci&author=B%20Thorens&volume=49&publication_year=2000&pages=1643-1648&pmid=11016447&doi=10.2337/diabetes.49.10.1643&)

28. Seyer P, et al. Hepatic glucose sensing is required to preserve β cell glucose competence. J. Clin. Invest. 2013;123:1662–1676. doi: 10.1172/JCI65538.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI65538) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3613916/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23549084/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Clin.%20Invest&title=Hepatic%20glucose%20sensing%20is%20required%20to%20preserve%20%CE%B2%20cell%20glucose%20competence.&author=P%20Seyer&volume=123&publication_year=2013&pages=1662-1676&pmid=23549084&doi=10.1172/JCI65538&)

29. Hundal RS, et al. Mechanism by which metformin reduces glucose production in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes. 2000;49:2063–2069. doi: 10.2337/diabetes.49.12.2063.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/diabetes.49.12.2063) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2995498/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11118008/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes&title=Mechanism%20by%20which%20metformin%20reduces%20glucose%20production%20in%20type%202%20diabetes.&author=RS%20Hundal&volume=49&publication_year=2000&pages=2063-2069&pmid=11118008&doi=10.2337/diabetes.49.12.2063&)

30. Fullerton MD, et al. Single phosphorylation sites in Acc1 and Acc2 regulate lipid homeostasis and the insulin-sensitizing effects of metformin. Nat. Med. 2013;19:1649–1654. doi: 10.1038/nm.3372.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3372) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4965268/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24185692/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Med&title=Single%20phosphorylation%20sites%20in%20Acc1%20and%20Acc2%20regulate%20lipid%20homeostasis%20and%20the%20insulin-sensitizing%20effects%20of%20metformin.&author=MD%20Fullerton&volume=19&publication_year=2013&pages=1649-1654&pmid=24185692&doi=10.1038/nm.3372&)

31. Pau CT, Keefe C, Duran J, Welt CK. Metformin improves glucose effectiveness, not insulin sensitivity: predicting treatment response in women with polycystic ovary syndrome in an open-label, interventional study. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2014;99:1870–1878. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-4021.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2013-4021) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4010712/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24606093/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Clin.%20Endocrinol.%20Metab&title=Metformin%20improves%20glucose%20effectiveness,%20not%20insulin%20sensitivity:%20predicting%20treatment%20response%20in%20women%20with%20polycystic%20ovary%20syndrome%20in%20an%20open-label,%20interventional%20study.&author=CT%20Pau&author=C%20Keefe&author=J%20Duran&author=CK%20Welt&volume=99&publication_year=2014&pages=1870-1878&pmid=24606093&doi=10.1210/jc.2013-4021&)

32. McCreight LJ, Bailey CJ, Pearson ER. Metformin and the gastrointestinal tract. Diabetologia. 2016;59:426–435. doi: 10.1007/s00125-015-3844-9.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-015-3844-9) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4742508/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26780750/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetologia&title=Metformin%20and%20the%20gastrointestinal%20tract.&author=LJ%20McCreight&author=CJ%20Bailey&author=ER%20Pearson&volume=59&publication_year=2016&pages=426-435&pmid=26780750&doi=10.1007/s00125-015-3844-9&)

33. Ait-Omar A, et al. GLUT2 accumulation in enterocyte apical and intracellular membranes: a study in morbidly obese human subjects and ob/ob and high fat–fed mice. Diabetes. 2011;60:2598–2607. doi: 10.2337/db10-1740.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/db10-1740) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3178286/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21852673/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes&title=GLUT2%20accumulation%20in%20enterocyte%20apical%20and%20intracellular%20membranes:%20a%20study%20in%20morbidly%20obese%20human%20subjects%20and%20ob/ob%20and%20high%20fat%E2%80%93fed%20mice.&author=A%20Ait-Omar&volume=60&publication_year=2011&pages=2598-2607&pmid=21852673&doi=10.2337/db10-1740&)

34. Gong L, Goswami S, Giacomini KM, Altman RB, Klein TE. Metformin pathways: pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Pharmacogenet. Genomics. 2012;22:820–827. doi: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e3283559b22.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0b013e3283559b22) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3651676/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22722338/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenet.%20Genomics&title=Metformin%20pathways:%20pharmacokinetics%20and%20pharmacodynamics.&author=L%20Gong&author=S%20Goswami&author=KM%20Giacomini&author=RB%20Altman&author=TE%20Klein&volume=22&publication_year=2012&pages=820-827&pmid=22722338&doi=10.1097/FPC.0b013e3283559b22&)

35. Bailey CJ. The current drug treatment landscape for diabetes and perspectives for the future. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 2015;98:170–184. doi: 10.1002/cpt.144.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/cpt.144) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25963904/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin.%20Pharmacol.%20Ther&title=The%20current%20drug%20treatment%20landscape%20for%20diabetes%20and%20perspectives%20for%20the%20future.&author=CJ%20Bailey&volume=98&publication_year=2015&pages=170-184&pmid=25963904&doi=10.1002/cpt.144&)

36. Banda Y, et al. Characterizing race/ethnicity and genetic ancestry for 100,000 subjects in the Genetic Epidemiology Research on Adult Health and Aging (GERA) cohort. Genetics. 2015;200:1285–1295. doi: 10.1534/genetics.115.178616.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.115.178616) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4574246/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26092716/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genetics&title=Characterizing%20race/ethnicity%20and%20genetic%20ancestry%20for%20100,000%20subjects%20in%20the%20Genetic%20Epidemiology%20Research%20on%20Adult%20Health%20and%20Aging%20(GERA)%20cohort.&author=Y%20Banda&volume=200&publication_year=2015&pages=1285-1295&pmid=26092716&doi=10.1534/genetics.115.178616&)

37. Morris AP, et al. Large-scale association analysis provides insights into the genetic architecture and pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes. Nat. Genet. 2012;44:981–990. doi: 10.1038/ng.2383.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2383) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3442244/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22885922/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Genet&title=Large-scale%20association%20analysis%20provides%20insights%20into%20the%20genetic%20architecture%20and%20pathophysiology%20of%20type%202%20diabetes.&author=AP%20Morris&volume=44&publication_year=2012&pages=981-990&pmid=22885922&doi=10.1038/ng.2383&)

38. Kooy A, et al. Long-term effects of metformin on metabolism and microvascular and macrovascular disease in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Arch. Intern. Med. 2009;169:616–625. doi: 10.1001/archinternmed.2009.20.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/archinternmed.2009.20) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19307526/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Arch.%20Intern.%20Med&title=Long-term%20effects%20of%20metformin%20on%20metabolism%20and%20microvascular%20and%20macrovascular%20disease%20in%20patients%20with%20type%202%20diabetes%20mellitus.&author=A%20Kooy&volume=169&publication_year=2009&pages=616-625&pmid=19307526&doi=10.1001/archinternmed.2009.20&)

39. Purcell S, et al. PLINK: a tool set for whole-genome association and population-based linkage analyses. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2007;81:559–575. doi: 10.1086/519795.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/519795) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1950838/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17701901/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Hum.%20Genet&title=PLINK:%20a%20tool%20set%20for%20whole-genome%20association%20and%20population-based%20linkage%20analyses.&author=S%20Purcell&volume=81&publication_year=2007&pages=559-575&pmid=17701901&doi=10.1086/519795&)

40. Price AL, et al. Principal components analysis corrects for stratification in genome-wide association studies. Nat. Genet. 2006;38:904–909. doi: 10.1038/ng1847.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1847) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16862161/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Genet&title=Principal%20components%20analysis%20corrects%20for%20stratification%20in%20genome-wide%20association%20studies.&author=AL%20Price&volume=38&publication_year=2006&pages=904-909&pmid=16862161&doi=10.1038/ng1847&)

41. Sherifali D, Nerenberg K, Pullenayegum E, Cheng JE, Gerstein HC. The effect of oral antidiabetic agents on A1C levels: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Care. 2010;33:1859–1864. doi: 10.2337/dc09-1727.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/dc09-1727) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2909079/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20484130/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes%20Care&title=The%20effect%20of%20oral%20antidiabetic%20agents%20on%20A1C%20levels:%20a%20systematic%20review%20and%20meta-analysis.&author=D%20Sherifali&author=K%20Nerenberg&author=E%20Pullenayegum&author=JE%20Cheng&author=HC%20Gerstein&volume=33&publication_year=2010&pages=1859-1864&pmid=20484130&doi=10.2337/dc09-1727&)

42. Postmus I, et al. Pharmacogenetic meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies of LDL cholesterol response to statins. Nat. Commun. 2014;5:5068. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6068.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms6068) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4220464/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25350695/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Commun&title=Pharmacogenetic%20meta-analysis%20of%20genome-wide%20association%20studies%20of%20LDL%20cholesterol%20response%20to%20statins.&author=I%20Postmus&volume=5&publication_year=2014&pages=5068&pmid=25350695&doi=10.1038/ncomms6068&)

43. Mägi R, Morris AP. GWAMA: software for genome-wide association meta-analysis. BMC Bioinformatics. 2010;11:288. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-11-288.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-11-288) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2893603/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20509871/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Bioinformatics&title=GWAMA:%20software%20for%20genome-wide%20association%20meta-analysis.&author=R%20M%C3%A4gi&author=AP%20Morris&volume=11&publication_year=2010&pages=288&pmid=20509871&doi=10.1186/1471-2105-11-288&)

44. Howie BN, Donnelly P, Marchini J. A flexible and accurate genotype imputation method for the next generation of genome-wide association studies. PLoS Genet. 2009;5:e1000529. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000529.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000529) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2689936/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19543373/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Genet&title=A%20flexible%20and%20accurate%20genotype%20imputation%20method%20for%20the%20next%20generation%20of%20genome-wide%20association%20studies.&author=BN%20Howie&author=P%20Donnelly&author=J%20Marchini&volume=5&publication_year=2009&pages=e1000529&pmid=19543373&doi=10.1371/journal.pgen.1000529&)

45. Marchini J, Howie B, Myers S, McVean G, Donnelly P. A new multipoint method for genome-wide association studies by imputation of genotypes. Nat. Genet. 2007;39:906–913. doi: 10.1038/ng2088.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng2088) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17572673/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Genet&title=A%20new%20multipoint%20method%20for%20genome-wide%20association%20studies%20by%20imputation%20of%20genotypes.&author=J%20Marchini&author=B%20Howie&author=S%20Myers&author=G%20McVean&author=P%20Donnelly&volume=39&publication_year=2007&pages=906-913&pmid=17572673&doi=10.1038/ng2088&)

46. Innocenti F, et al. Identification, replication, and functional fine-mapping of expression quantitative trait loci in primary human liver tissue. PLoS Genet. 2011;7:e1002078. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002078.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1002078) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3102751/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21637794/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Genet&title=Identification,%20replication,%20and%20functional%20fine-mapping%20of%20expression%20quantitative%20trait%20loci%20in%20primary%20human%20liver%20tissue.&author=F%20Innocenti&volume=7&publication_year=2011&pages=e1002078&pmid=21637794&doi=10.1371/journal.pgen.1002078&)

47. Schröder A, et al. Genomics of ADME gene expression: mapping expression quantitative trait loci relevant for absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion of drugs in human liver. Pharmacogenomics J. 2013;13:12–20. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2011.44.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/tpj.2011.44) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3564008/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22006096/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics%20J&title=Genomics%20of%20ADME%20gene%20expression:%20mapping%20expression%20quantitative%20trait%20loci%20relevant%20for%20absorption,%20distribution,%20metabolism%20and%20excretion%20of%20drugs%20in%20human%20liver.&author=A%20Schr%C3%B6der&volume=13&publication_year=2013&pages=12-20&pmid=22006096&doi=10.1038/tpj.2011.44&)

48. Schadt EE, et al. Mapping the genetic architecture of gene expression in human liver. PLoS Biol. 2008;6:e107. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0060107.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0060107) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2365981/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18462017/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Biol&title=Mapping%20the%20genetic%20architecture%20of%20gene%20expression%20in%20human%20liver.&author=EE%20Schadt&volume=6&publication_year=2008&pages=e107&pmid=18462017&doi=10.1371/journal.pbio.0060107&)

49. Xia K, et al. seeQTL: a searchable database for human eQTLs. Bioinformatics. 2012;28:451–452. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr678.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btr678) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3268245/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22171328/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=seeQTL:%20a%20searchable%20database%20for%20human%20eQTLs.&author=K%20Xia&volume=28&publication_year=2012&pages=451-452&pmid=22171328&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btr678&)

50. Dahlin A, et al. Gene expression profiling of transporters in the solute carrier and ATP-binding cassette superfamilies in human eye substructures. Mol. Pharm. 2013;10:650–663. doi: 10.1021/mp300429e.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1021/mp300429e) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4032224/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23268600/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Pharm&title=Gene%20expression%20profiling%20of%20transporters%20in%20the%20solute%20carrier%20and%20ATP-binding%20cassette%20superfamilies%20in%20human%20eye%20substructures.&author=A%20Dahlin&volume=10&publication_year=2013&pages=650-663&pmid=23268600&doi=10.1021/mp300429e&)

51. Liang X, et al. Metformin is a substrate and inhibitor of the human thiamine transporter, THTR-2 (SLC19A3). Mol. Pharm. 2015;12:4301–4310. doi: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.5b00501.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.5b00501) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4800991/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26528626/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Pharm&title=Metformin%20is%20a%20substrate%20and%20inhibitor%20of%20the%20human%20thiamine%20transporter,%20THTR-2%20(SLC19A3).&author=X%20Liang&volume=12&publication_year=2015&pages=4301-4310&pmid=26528626&doi=10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.5b00501&)
