# Functional genomics of C190T single nucleotide polymorphism in human N-acetyltransferase 2.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Yuanqi Zhu, Mark A Doll, David W Hein
**Journal:** Biological chemistry
**Year:** 2002
**PMID:** 12222688

## Abstract

N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) catalyzes N-acetylation and O-acetylation of many drugs and environmental carcinogens. Genetic polymorphisms in the NAT2 gene have been associated with differential susceptibility to cancers and drug toxicity from these compounds. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been identified in the human NAT2 coding region. A new allele, NAT2*19, possessing the C190T (R64W) exchange, was recently identified. In order to understand the effect of this new SNP, recombinant NAT2*4 (reference) and NAT2*19 were expressed in yeast (Schizosaccharomyces pombe). The C190T (R64W) SNP in NAT2*19 caused substantial reduction in the NAT2 protein level and stability, but did not cause significant reduction in transformation efficiency or mRNA level. The enzymatic activities for N-acetylation of two arylamine carcinogens (2-aminofluorene, 4-aminobiphenyl), and a sulfonamide drug (sulfamethazine) were over 100-fold lower for NAT2 19 compared to reference NAT2 4. Kinetic studies showed a reduction in Vmax but no significant change in substrate Km. In addition, the SNP caused significant reduction in the O-acetylation of the N-hydroxy-2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo [4,5-b] pyridine. These results show that NAT2*19 possessing the C190T (R64W) SNP encodes a slow acetylator phenotype for both N- and O-acetylation, due to a reduction in the amount and stability of the NAT2 19 allozyme.
