# The influence of various genotypes on the metabolic activity of NAT2 in a Chinese population.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Bing Chen, Wei-Xia Zhang, Wei-Min Cai
**Journal:** European journal of clinical pharmacology
**Year:** 2006
**PMID:** 16570187

## Abstract

**AIM:** To determine the phenotype and genotype of NAT2 in a Chinese population and study the influence of various NAT2 genotypes on the NAT2 activity.

**METHODS:** A reverse dot blot method was used to detect the genotype of NAT2 in 120 healthy Chinese subjects. All subjects were given a single dose of 500 mg sulphadimidine (SM(2)). The plasma concentration of SM(2) and acetyl-SM(2) (AcSM(2)) 6 h after administration was determined. Molar metabolic ratio (MR) was calculated by the ratio of AcSM(2) to AcSM(2)+SM(2).

**RESULTS:** Totals of 53 (44.2%), 47 (39.2%) and 20 (16.7%) subjects were homozygotes for wild type (wt/wt), heterozygotes for mutant (m/wt) and homozygotes for mutant (m/m), respectively. The MR of 120 subjects was 0.714+/-0.237. Twenty subjects (16.7%) were classified as poor metabolizers. All subjects in the m/m group were poor metabolizers. The MRs of the wt/wt, m/wt and m/m groups were 0.886+/-0.060, 0.719+/-0.089 and 0.246+/-0.105 (P<0.001), respectively. There was a significant difference between different NAT2 m/wt genotypes (P<0.001) and m/m genotypes (P<0.001). MR correlated well with NAT2 genotypes (r=0.947).

**CONCLUSION:** Various NAT2 genotypes have a significant impact on the metabolic activity of NAT2 in Chinese people.
