# Polymorphic N-acetyltransferase (NAT2) genotyping of Emiratis.

## Metadata
**Authors:** N M Woolhouse, M M Qureshi, S M Bastaki, M Patel, Y Abdulrazzaq, R A Bayoumi
**Journal:** Pharmacogenetics
**Year:** 1997
**PMID:** 9110365

## Abstract

Polymorphic N-acetyltransferase (NAT2) genotypes were determined in 106 unrelated Emiratis by PCR-RFLP analysis to obtain estimates of allele frequencies. Thirteen different genotypes were found, four associated with the rapid acetylator phenotype and nine with the slow acetylator phenotype. Among 67 phenotypically slow acetylators, there was 100% concordance between phenotype and genotype. Among 39 phenotypically rapid acetylators, 37 possessed at least one wild type allele; a 95% concordance with genotype. Seven different NAT2 alleles associated with slow acetylation were found. The commonest was a NAT2*5 type (C481T) allele which occurred with a frequency of 0.53, a significantly higher frequency than has been reported for other ethnic groups. A second slow allele, a NAT2*6 type (G590A), occurred with a frequency of 0.21. The most common genotypes found were NAT2*5/*5 homozygotes, NAT2*5/*6 heterozygotes and NAT2*4/*5 heterozygotes with frequencies of 0.25, 0.25 and 0.22 respectively. The high overall prevalence of alleles associated with slow acetylation (173/212; 81.6%) among Emiratis is consistent with previously reported high frequency of the slow acetylator phenotype in Arabs. Two apparently new slow alleles were identified but have not yet been fully characterized. One appears to be a NAT2*5 variant allele. The other uncharacterized allele appears likely to contain an entirely new mutation associated with slow acetylation.
