# Effects of genetic variation at the CYP2C19/CYP2C9 locus on pharmacokinetics of chlorcycloguanil in adult Gambians.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Ramatoulie E Janha, Fatoumatta Sisay-Joof, Majidah Hamid-Adiamoh, Archibald Worwui, Hannah L Chapman, Hyginus Opara, Sam Dunyo, Paul Milligan, Kirk Rockett, Peter Winstanley, Munir Pirmohamed, Ann K Miller, David J Conway, Robert T Walton
**Journal:** Pharmacogenomics
**Year:** 2009
**PMID:** 19761366

## Abstract

**AIMS:** Antimalarial biguanides are metabolized by CYP2C19, thus genetic variation at the CYP2C locus might affect pharmacokinetics and so treatment outcome for malaria.

**MATERIALS & METHODS:** Polymorphisms in CYP2C19 and CYP2C9 in 43 adult Gambians treated with chlorproguanil/dapsone for uncomplicated malaria were assessed. Chlorcycloguanil pharmacokinetics were measured and associations with CYP2C19 and CYP2C9 alleles and CYP2C19 metabolizer groups investigated.

**RESULTS:** All CYP2C19/CYP2C9 alleles obeyed Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. There were 15 CYP2C19/2C9 haplotypes with a common haplotype frequency of 0.23. Participants with the CYP2C19*17 allele had higher chlorcycloguanil area under the concentration versus curve at 24 h (AUC(0-24)) than those without (geometric means: 317 vs 216 ng.h/ml; ratio of geometric means: 1.46; 95% CI: 1.03 to 2.09; p = 0.0363) and higher C(max) (geometric mean ratio: 1.52; 95% CI: 1.13 to 2.05; p = 0.0071).

**CONCLUSION:** CYP2C19*17 determines antimalarial biguanide metabolic profile at the CYP2C19/CYP2C9 locus.
