# Genetic polymorphism of cytochrome P450s and P-glycoprotein in the Finnish population.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Johanna Hilli, Anders Rane, Stefan Lundgren, Leif Bertilsson, Kari Laine
**Journal:** Fundamental & clinical pharmacology
**Year:** 2007
**PMID:** 17635176

## Abstract

The objective of this study was to investigate the genetic polymorphism of selected cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes and ABCB1 (encoding P-glycoprotein) of central importance with regard to the disposition of clinically used drugs in the Finnish population and to compare the results to pre-existing data from Caucasian populations. A random sample of 449 Finns was studied. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped using blood-derived genomic DNA and 5'-nuclease assays. We found that the allele frequencies of CYP1A2 SNP g.-163C>A, CYP2C8*3, CYP2C9*2, CYP2C9*3 and CYP2C19*2 were similar to those seen in other Caucasian populations. However, the allelic frequency of the variant ABCB1 SNP c.3435C>T allele was lower than previously reported. The frequency of the homozygous CYP3A5*1 expression was significantly higher than expected based on Hardy-Weinberg calculations (observed n = 8 vs. expected n = 3, P = 0.01). Other genotype frequencies corresponded to the expected values. The strong linkage between the CYP2C8*3 and the CYP2C9*2 alleles was confirmed in this study and the number of individuals with the rare haplotype CYP2C8*3*3/CYP2C9*2*2 was higher than expected. We conclude that the frequency of mutated CYP alleles in Finns were in agreement with earlier findings in Caucasian populations, but a lower frequency of the ABCB1 variant allele 3435T corresponding to that reported in Asian populations was found. The higher than expected frequency of the CYP3A5*1*1 genotype and the CYP2C8*3*3/CYP2C9*2*2 haplotype may influence the response to treatment with drugs metabolized by these enzymes.
