# Polymorphic analysis of CYP2C9 gene in Vietnamese population.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Nhung Phuong Vu, Thuong Thi Huyen Ma, Ngoc Thi Bich Tran, Hue Thi Thu Huynh, Ton Dang Nguyen, Duong Thuy Nguyen, Hai Van Nong, Ming Ta Michael Lee, Ha Hai Nguyen
**Journal:** Molecular biology reports
**Year:** 2018
**PMID:** 29978384

## Abstract

Genetic variations in CYP2C9 are associated to inter-individual variability of drugs metabolism and response. The only report has been done previously mainly focusing on the common variant alleles of CYP2C9 in Vietnamese Kinh subjects. However, little is known about the complete spectrum of this gene polymorphism in different ethnic groups of Vietnam. We sequenced the promoter region and all exons of CYP2C9 in 100 healthy unrelated Vietnamese Kinh subjects. Additionally, common CYP2C9 variants, *2 and *3, were also analyzed by RFLP-PCR in extra 194 Kinh subjects and 279 of other four ethnic groups in Vietnam. The results of these common variants observed from five ethnic groups were compared with other populations in the world. Seven previously reported alleles and two genotypes were determined in Kinh subjects. The percentage of CYP2C9*1 and CYP2C9*3 alleles are 96.5 and 3.5%, respectively. We found one novel non-synonymous variant in exon 7 leading to amino acid change at 363 position from proline to histidine. Functional analysis by SIFT and Polyphen-2 indicated that this mutation is intolerant and probably damaging. Prevalence of CYP2C9*2 observed in Vietnamese population was significantly lower compared with that of other populations in the South and West of Asia as well as in Europe. This study provides information of genetic distribution pattern of CYP2C9 in Vietnamese, which would be useful for optimizing drug therapies in Vietnam.
