# Polymorphic drug metabolizing CYP-enzymes--a pathogenic factor in oral lichen planus?

## Metadata
**Authors:** C Kragelund, C Hansen, J Reibel, B Nauntofte, K Broesen, A M L Pedersen, D Smidt, H Eiberg, L A Torpet
**Journal:** Journal of oral pathology & medicine : official publication of the International Association of Oral Pathologists and the American Academy of Oral Pathology
**Year:** 2009
**PMID:** 19192051

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** Oral lichen planus (OLP) is a chronic mucosal disease with a characteristic clinical phenotype. Environmental exposures, e.g. drugs have been associated with the pathogenesis.

**OBJECTIVES:** To test the hypothesis that some OLP lesions have a pharmacological pathogenesis related to polymorphisms of the cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYPs) resulting in poor or intermediate CYP metabolism.

**METHODS:** One hundred and twenty patients with OLP and 180 gender-matched controls without OLP were genotyped for CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP2D6 alleles with absent or reduced function.

**RESULTS:** The prevalence of poor or intermediate metabolizers was not higher among the OLPs as compared with the controls; however, there were higher numbers of variant CYP2D6 genotypes among the OLP females (P < 0.05). There were no differences between the groups with regard to intake of drugs metabolized by polymorphic CYPs or drug or herbal products inhibiting CYPs. The prevalence of CYP2D6*4 alleles among the OLPs was higher [28%; 95% confidence interval (CI) 20-36%] than previously reported among Danes (19%; 95% CI 17-22%). Fifty per cent of the OLPs had a CYP2D6*4 genotype as compared with 30% in the background population (P = 0.0001). The CYP2D6*4 protein has sequence homology with human herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV1) and Candida albicans, which may result in molecular mimicry.

**CONCLUSION:** It was not possible to substantiate a pharmacological pathogenesis of OLP based on poor or intermediate CYP metabolism. However, molecular mimicry between CYP2D6, in particular CYP2D6*4, and common oral pathogens may be involved in the pathogenesis of OLP.
