# Effects of genotypic differences in CYP2C19 status on cure rates for Helicobacter pylori infection by dual therapy with rabeprazole plus amoxicillin.

## Metadata
**Authors:** T Furuta, N Shirai, M Takashima, F Xiao, H Hanai, K Nakagawa, H Sugimura, K Ohashi, T Ishizaki
**Journal:** Pharmacogenetics
**Year:** 2001
**PMID:** 11434512

## Abstract

Rabeprazole is a potent proton pump inhibitor and is mainly reduced to thioether rabeprazole by a non-enzymatic pathway and partially metabolized to demethylated rabeprazole by CYP2C19 in the liver. We intended to determine a cure rate for Helicobacter pylori infection by dual rabeprazole/amoxicillin therapy in relation to CYP2C19 genotype status prospectively. Ninety-seven patients with gastritis and H. pylori infection completed the dual therapy with 10 mg of rabeprazole bid and 500 mg of amoxicillin tid for 2 weeks. At 1 month after treatment, cure of H. pylori infection was assessed on the basis of histology, a rapid urease test, culture, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and 13C-urea breath test. CYP2C19 genotype status was determined by a PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism method. Of the 97 patients, 33 were homozygous extensive metabolizers (homEM), 48 were heterozygous extensive metabolizers (hetEM), and 16 were poor metabolizers (PM). Cure of H. pylori infection was achieved in 79 of the 97 patients (81.4%, 95%CI = 71.9-88.7). Significant differences in cure rates among the homEM, hetEM, and PM groups were observed; 60.6% (95%CI = 42.1-77.3), 91.7% (95%CI = 80.0-97.7), and 93.8% (95%CI = 69.8-99.8), respectively (P = 0.0007). Twelve patients without cure after initial treatment (10 homEMs and 2 hetEMs) were successfully retreated with rabeprazole 10 mg q.i.d. and amoxicillin 500 mg q.i.d. for 2 weeks. The cure rates for H. pylori infection by dual rabeprazole/amoxicillin therapy depended on the CYP2C19 genotype status. This dual therapy appears to be effective for hetEM and PM patients. However, high dose dual rabeprazole/amoxicillin therapy was effective even for homEM patients. Therefore, the genotyping test of CYP2C19 appears to be a clinically useful tool for the optimal dual treatment with rabeprazole plus amoxicillin.
