# Genotyping of cytochrome p450 isoform genes is useful for forensic identification of cadaver.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Kento Ogawa, Manabu Suno, Keiko Shimizu, Masatsugu Yoshida, Toshio Awaya, Kazuo Matsubara, Hiroshi Shiono
**Journal:** Legal medicine (Tokyo, Japan)
**Year:** 2003
**PMID:** 14568772

## Abstract

Tailor-made medical treatment based on the polymorphism of genes encoding drug-metabolizing enzymes has been advocated and is being tried on an experimental basis at numerous centers. If DNA polymorphism analysis becomes routine in tailor-made medical treatment, it will be very useful in forensic identification. In this study, we determined the genotype frequencies of five p450 (CYP) isoform genes, CYP1A2, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 in 196 Japanese individuals to evaluate their forensic usefulness. These genes encode the most important enzymes among the CYP superfamily that metabolize clinically used drug. The frequency of each allele agreed well with those reported previously and their genotype frequencies did not deviate from those expected from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. CYP2C subfamilies such as CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 on chromosome 10 showed high sequence homology, as high as over 95% in the regions flanking polymorphic sites. Although 3240 genotype combinations of these five CYP isoform genes are theoretically possible, 101 combinations were detected in this study. The genotype frequencies of these five isoform genes excluded their linkage. The following two genotype combinations showed the highest frequency of 0.036: CYP1A2*1A/*1A, CYP2D6*1/*10, CYP2E1*1/*1, CYP2C9*1/*1 and CYP2C19*1/*1 and CYP1A2*1A/*1C, CYP2D6*1/*10, CYP2E1*1/*1, CYP2C9*1/*1 and CYP2C19*1/*1. Thus, genotyping of CYP isoform genes should be useful in forensic identification.
