# The Influence of CYP2C19 Polymorphism on Eradication of Helicobacter pylori: A Prospective Randomized Study of Lansoprazole and Rabeprazole.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Jeong Hoon Lee, Hwoon-Yong Jung, Kee Don Choi, Ho June Song, Gin Hyug Lee, Jin-Ho Kim
**Journal:** Gut and liver
**Year:** 2010
**PMID:** 20559522

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND/AIMS:** The CYP2C19 polymorphism plays an important role in the metabolism of various proton-pump inhibitors. Several trials have produced conflicting data on eradication rates of Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) among CYP2C19 genotypes. We investigated whether the CYP2C19 genotype affects the eradication rate of H. pylori by direct comparing the effects of lansoprazole- and rabeprazole-based triple therapies.

**METHODS:** A total of 492 patients infected with H. pylori was randomly treated with either 30 mg of lansoprazole or 20 mg of rabeprazole plus 500 mg of clarithromycin and 1,000 mg of amoxicillin twice daily for 1 week. CYP2C19 genotype status was determined by a PCR-restriction-fragment-length polymorphism method. After 7 to 8 weeks, H. pylori status was evaluated by a C(13)-urea breath test.

**RESULTS:** Four hundred and sixty-three patients were analyzed, and the eradication rate was 75.2% in a per-protocol analysis. Eradication rates for the lansoprazole regimen (n=234) were 73.8%, 80.7%, and 85.4% in the homozygous extensive (HomEM), heterozygous extensive (HetEM), and poor metabolizers (PM) groups, respectively (p=0.303). In the case of the rabeprazole regimen (n=229), the eradication rates were 68.6%, 73.0%, and 71.9% in the HomEM, HetEM, and PM groups, respectively (p=0.795).

**CONCLUSIONS:** The efficacies of triple therapies that include lansoprazole or rabeprazole are not affected by CYP2C19 genetic polymorphisms.
