# Bantu Tanzanians have a decreased capacity to metabolize omeprazole and mephenytoin in relation to their CYP2C19 genotype.

## Metadata
**Authors:** K Herrlin, A Y Massele, M Jande, C Alm, G Tybring, Y A Abdi, A Wennerholm, I Johansson, M L Dahl, L Bertilsson, L L Gustafsson
**Journal:** Clinical pharmacology and therapeutics
**Year:** 1998
**PMID:** 9797796

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVE:** To investigate the CYP2C19 polymorphism in Tanzanians because this enzyme shows large interindividual differences in activity and metabolizes several drugs of importance in Africa, especially the antimalarial agent chloroguanide (INN, proguanil).

**METHODS:** Two hundred fifty-one Tanzanian healthy volunteers were phenotyped with respect to CYP2C19 with use of a single oral dose of mephenytoin (n = 106), a single oral dose of omeprazole (n = 207), or both. Sixty-two were phenotyped with both probe drugs. The urinary 0- to 8-hour S/R-mephenytoin ratio and the plasma omeprazole metabolic ratio (MR) (omeprazole/hydroxyomeprazole) 3 hours after drug intake were determined. The genotype was determined by analysis for CYP2C19*1 (wt), CYP2C19*2 (m1), and CYP2C19*3 (m2). Ten subjects with high omeprazole MR were screened for new mutations in the CYP2C19 gene by searching for single-strand conformation polymorphisms (SSCP).

**RESULTS:** Eight subjects were classified as mephenytoin poor metabolizers (7.5%). Only 5 of these were homozygous for mutated alleles. The S/R ratio was skewed to the right (lower CYP2C19 activity) compared with other ethnic groups studied previously. No new mutations were found with polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-SSCP. We found 30 volunteers (14.5%) with an MR > 7, which is the antimode found previously in white subjects and Asian subjects. Of the 251 volunteers genotyped, 3.2% were homozygous for mutated alleles and 66.1% were homozygous for the wild-type allele. The allele frequencies of CYP2C19*1, *2, and *3 were 81.5%, 17.9%, and 0.6%, respectively. The correlation between the S/R-mephenytoin ratio and the omeprazole MR was significant (Spearman r = 0.59; P < .01).

**CONCLUSION:** Tanzanians have a decreased capacity to metabolize both omeprazole and mephenytoin when their genotype is compared with metabolic capacity and genotype in other previously studied populations. We identified a low frequency of the Asian allele (CYP2C19*3). Although we did not find any new mutations, our results may be consistent with the presence of yet-unidentified mutations of CYP2C19 that causes decreased CYP2C19 activity in the Tanzanian population.
