# Genetic variations in the xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19 and susceptibility to colorectal cancer among Turkish people.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Gül Özhan, Mine Mutur, Gulcin Ercan, Buket Alpertunga
**Journal:** Genetic testing and molecular biomarkers
**Year:** 2014
**PMID:** 24527758

## Abstract

Cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes are genetically polymorphic and play key roles in the metabolism of xenobiotics. Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common malignant tumors in Turkey as well as in the world. In this study, it was aimed both to evaluate the effects of CYP variants on the susceptibility to CRC and to predict the individual response of the Turkish people to xenobiotics metabolized by CYP enzymes. For that, we assessed the association of CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19 polymorphisms in patients with CRC in the Turkish population through a case-control study. Distributions of the variants were determined in 104 patients with CRC and 183 healthy volunteers. As results, CYP1A1 6235T/C was significantly associated with CRC risk (odds ratio [OR]=2.53; 95% confidence interval [CI]=0.99-6.45; p=0.046). In a haplotype-based analysis, CYP1A1 haplotype C6235-A2455 might be associated with the development of CRC (OR=2.70; 95% CI=0.58-5.90; p=0.046). We believe that the findings are the first results of CYP allele distributions in the Turkish population and provide an understanding of the epidemiological studies that correlate therapeutic approaches and etiology of CRC especially in Turkish patients.
