# Association between CLOCK gene polymorphisms and ADHD in Mexican teenagers: A comprehensive assessment

## Metadata
**Authors:** Alfonso Cabrera Lagunes, Adriana Díaz-Anzaldúa, Gustavo Rojas Andrade, Vanessa-Giselle Peschard, Adriana Arias Caballero, César Enrique Gaspar-Barba, Arlette Yunes Jimenez, Francisco Rafael De la Peña Olvera, Carlos Sabas Cruz Fuentes, Miriam Feria-Aranda, Liz Sosa Mora, Armando Pérez Molina, Diana Guizar Sanchez, Lino Palacios-Cruz
**Journal:** Psychiatry research
**Date:** 2022 Sep 5
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.psychres.2022.114835](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2022.114835)
**PMID:** 36166946
**PMCID:** PMC10824139
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10824139/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10824139/pdf/nihms-1959508.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10824139/pdf/nihms-1959508.pdf)

## Abstract

This study aimed to evaluate markers of the CLOCK gene rs1801260 and rs4864548 in Mexican adolescents, addressing clinical and biological aspects previously associated with ADHD. 347 Mexican adolescents were assessed for mental disorders, metabolic disruption and related conditions, circadian preference, as well as genotyping for the CLOCK. We found a significant association between ADHD and the AA and AG genotypes of rs1801260. Also, we identified in the ADHD group that the total Triiodothyronine and total Thyroxine values were respectively 10 ng/dl units and 0.58 ug/dl units lower in females than in males. Previously reported common variations of the CLOCK gene have been associated with ADHD like the Rs1801260 polymorphism hereby we could consider it as risk factor, but genetic, biochemical and clinical studies in the Mexican population are entailed.

Keywords: Attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity, Risk factors, Genotype, Single nucleotide polymorphism, Circadian rhythm, Triiodothyronine, Thyroxine

## 1. Introduction

Attention Deficit and Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is one of the most common neurodevelopmental disorders in children and teenagers, and it is characterized by a persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes with functioning or development ([American Psychiatric Association, 2013](#R2)). Its worldwide prevalence throughout life is 5.29%.([Polanczyk et al., 2015](#R54)) In addition, a higher prevalence has been reported in males in clinical samples (3–4 males: 1 female) than in epidemiological studies (2: 1) ([Medina-Mora et al., 2007](#R49); [Polanczyk et al., 2015](#R54)). Mexican teenagers’ yearly prevalence is at least 1.6% while the male-female ratio is consistent with reports of other populations([Benjet et al., 2009](#R10), [2016](#R11); [Medina-Mora et al., 2007](#R49)).

There are several clinical courses throughout life; however, three primary presentations can be identified: predominantly inattentive, hyperactive-impulsive, and combined presentations; the onset may be in childhood, adolescence, or adulthood. In the clinical context, people with ADHD could present a greater psychiatric and health comorbidity, poorer performance in a wide range of scenarios, more difficulties in the academic and justice context, as well as increased use of healthcare and public services ([Young et al., 2021](#R69)) due to the proclivity to injuries, legal issues, premature death ([Dalsgaard et al., 2015](#R24)), suicide behavior ([Septier et al., 2019](#R59)), and unplanned parenthood ([Skoglund et al., 2019](#R61)), compared with those who do not have this disorder.

About 50% to 80% of children with ADHD may have sleep disturbance, including sleep-onset insomnia, poor or fragmented sleep, daytime sleepiness, and sleep-disordered breathing ([Cortese et al., 2009](#R21)), and these have been linked with an evening chronotype.

A link between sleep quality and thyroid function has been shown ([Nazem et al., 2021](#R51)). Results from prior studies suggest that the prevalence of thyroid abnormalities is higher (5.4%) in children with ADHD than in the general population (<1%) ([Weiss et al., 1993](#R66)) and could be related to the proposed association between maternal thyroid dysfunction and ADHD in their offspring ([Drover et al., 2019](#R28)), and with a higher thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) concentration during pregnancy ([Ghassabian et al., 2011](#R33)). However, given the inconsistency of the findings, further analysis is required.

In addition, like in every mammal, our whole physiology, metabolism, and behavior with structured daily rhythms are driven by a circadian system ([Buijs et al., 2021](#R14); [Ikegami et al., 2019](#R37)). Therefore, circadian desynchrony could enhance the probability of developing behavioral disruptions and conditions associated with metabolic syndrome (MetS), such as abdominal obesity, high triglycerides, and fasting glucose levels, low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, and hypertension ([Cortese et al., 2016](#R22)). Although there is a theoretical debate about a possible relationship between ADHD and MetS, there is an etiological model in which ADHD, from childhood through adulthood, is linked to an increased risk of MetS due to the following symptoms: psychiatric and somatic comorbidities, core ADHD symptoms, and sleep disturbances. When ADHD and Non-ADHD samples were compared in a national Swedish study, adults with ADHD were more likely to have Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and hypertension ([Chen et al., 2018](#R17)), suggesting that obesity is the main comorbidity associated with MetS. However, this association needs to be further analyzed; it has been suggested by a meta-analysis that the association between ADHD and obesity may not be present in the pre-adolescent years, probably present in teenage girls with comorbid disorders, and present in adults ([Nigg et al., 2016](#R52)). A recent study reported no significant relationship between obesity and ADHD among mostly Hispanic children with a mean age of 11.64 years (6 to 17 years old) in the US-Mexico Border, and contrary to prior research, children with ADHD were more likely to be underweight. These studies highlight the need to analyze ethnicity and sex when evaluating a possible association between ADHD and metabolic disorders such as obesity([Salcido et al., 2021](#R57)). Previous research has proposed an association between circadian genetic markers and thyroid function, or conditions associated with MetS ([Angelousi et al., 2018](#R5)).

Regarding genetics, several studies have shown that ADHD is a highly heritable disorder, with up to 76% of the phenotypic variance attributed to genetic factors ([Faraone et al., 2005](#R31)). Susceptibility to ADHD could be associated in part with common variation within the genome, called polymorphisms, located in or close to some genes that encode for receptors and transporters of the catecholaminergic, serotonergic, nicotinic, and glutamatergic neurotransmitter systems ([Groenman et al., 2016](#R35); [Klein et al., 2017](#R41); [Yadav et al., 2021](#R68)). However, this genetic variation may only represent a small fraction of the reported genetic variance suggested in some genome-wide association studies ([Grimm et al., 2020](#R34)). Other candidate genes and systems, including the circadian rhythm, have been related to ADHD ([Bijlenga et al., 2019](#R12)).

One of the main genes involved in this circadian system is the *Circadian Locomotor Output Cycles Kaput* (CLOCK) gene that encodes the Clock Circadian Regulator Transcription Factor ([Schuch et al., 2018](#R58)). ADHD has been associated with marker T3111C (rs1801260 A/G) in Caucasians ([Kissling et al., 2008](#R40)) and Taiwanese adults ([Xu et al., 2010](#R67)); in a Brazilian sample, a haplotype encompassing rs1801260 and G276A (rs4864548 G/A) was also associated with ADHD ([Carpena et al., 2019](#R16)). In addition, a study in a non-clinical child population described that sex potentially modified the association between rs1801260 and Body Mass Index (BMI) z-scores. In girls, the G-allele carriers had higher BMI z-scores at baseline and follow-up ([Meng et al., 2020](#R50)), while other studies indicated a possible interaction between rs4864548 and sleep in European children from New Zealand ([Krishnan et al., 2017](#R43)). This suggests that these polymorphisms may be distinctly associated with sleep duration and body weight regulation in clinical non-psychiatric and psychiatric samples.

Along with new genetic discoveries regarding ADHD, it is important to expand our knowledge of the phenotype through clinical and biological assessments, and to determine what aspects of the phenotype may be associated with genetic variants. As previously described, individuals with ADHD may have a higher risk of behavioral and metabolic conditions. Our hypothesis is that in our sample of adolescents that attend a tertiary psychiatric care institution, ADHD may be associated with two polymorphisms in the CLOCK gene (rs1801260 and rs4864548,) but also with conditions such as an evening chronotype, and differences in thyroid and metabolic function ([Albrecht et al., 2020](#R4); [Coogan and McGowan, 2017](#R20)); this associations may be affected by sex. The aim of the study was to determine if there is an association between rs1801260 and rs4864548 CLOCK polymorphisms, ADHD and their clinical psychiatric profiles, circadian preference, thyroid function markers, and some metabolic markers in Mexican teenagers recruited in a tertiary psychiatric care institution, and if this association is affected by sex.

## 2. Methods

### 2.1. Study participants

A comparative cross-sectional study was carried out with a sample of Mexican teenagers who were recruited using a consecutive non-probabilistic sampling. The sample size calculation was calculated with the software OpenEpi v3.01 with a 95% confidence interval and 80% power and expected N of 304 subjects. They were clinically assessed from 2008 to 2016 at a tertiary care psychiatric institution in Mexico City. We included unmedicated teenagers who met the clinical assessment criteria for ADHD and any other psychiatric disorder according to the DSM-IV ([American Psychiatric Association, 1994](#R1)). Exclusion criteria were the diagnosis of any neurological disorders or brain damage, thyroid disorders, diabetes, dyslipidemia, or any other known endocrine dysfunction as well as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or any other cognitive condition that, according to the evaluator, could interfere with the ability of the subject to provide a free and informed consent to participate. This study was approved by the Ethics Committee in Research of the National Institute of Psychiatry (internal project identification PAI9487, IC112034.0) It was conducted following the Declaration of Helsinki, the guidelines of The Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences, and the Mexican General Health Law on Health Research. Parents provided written informed consent and probands a written assent to participate.

### 2.2. Explanatory covariates

#### 2.2.1. Biochemical diagnostic criteria

Given the lack of reference values in the Mexican pediatric population, we considered the age and sex standardized values reported in the international literature, including the criteria proposed by the consensus of the International Diabetes Federation ([Chu et al., 2019](#R18)) and the [Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular Health and Risk Reduction in Children and Teenagers (2011)](#R30) by the Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular health and risk reduction in children and adolescents for the lipid panel and glucose. BMI values by age were reported according to the Growth Tables of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for boys and girls ([Kuczmarski et al., 2002](#R44)). Reference intervals for thyroid function tests: Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), total Triiodothyronine (T3), and total Levothyroxine (T4) were reported and compared to available international pediatric reference intervals such as the Canadian Laboratory Initiative on Pediatric Reference Intervals (CALIPER) and the American Association of Clinical Chemistry’s (AACC) Pediatric Reference Range Initiative ([Kohse, 2015](#R42)).

#### 2.2.2. Clinical diagnostic criteria

The Morningness-Eveningness Scale for Children (MESC) score was used to measure circadian preference or chronotype. This 10-item scale evaluates the preferred timing for certain activities such as sleeping habits, self-assessment of the level of alertness, physical achievement, and mood ([Adan and Natale, 2002](#R3); [Díaz-Morales et al., 2007](#R26); [Díaz-Morales and Escribano, 2013](#R27)). The instrument was adapted to different cultural contexts and its validity has been compared to a previously reported reliability of *α* = 0.70 in Spanish and Peruvian teenagers ([Díaz-Morales et al., 2007](#R26)). Items have a response scale with four or five options. The total score ranges from 10 (eveningness) to 43 (morningness). To determine the chronotype, extreme percentiles were considered. Scores between 23 and 28 were categorized as undifferentiated, scores >29 as morning chronotype and <22 as evening chronotype.

The clinical assessment of the teenagers with ADHD was performed by a certified psychiatrist with at least fifteen years of clinical experience. The average time of the evaluation was two hours in two separate clinical assessments. Psychiatrists who participated in this study carried out a diagnosis of any mental disorder following DSM-IV and re-assessed using the DSM-5 criteria and the Mexican version of the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale for Children- 25(BPRS-C)) ([De la Peña et al., 2005](#R25)). This extended version of the original BPRS-C of 21 items includes questions assessing elimination disorders, hyperthymia, alcohol, tobacco, the use and abuse of other drugs, as well as psychological and sexual abuse. Inter-rater and test-retest reliability were *r* = 0.824 and *r* = 0.661, respectively ([Lachar et al., 2001](#R45); [De la Peña et at., 2005](#R25); [Ulloa et al., 2011](#R63)).

### 2.3. DNA isolation and genotyping

The DNA was isolated from saliva or blood samples using standard procedures. We performed genotyping of markers rs1801260 G/A at the 3′ untranslated region of the CLOCK gene (also known as T3111C) and rs4864548 (G276A). For rs1801260, a Bio-Rad ICycler was used, with 3 min at 94 °C followed by 30 cycles (30 s at 94 °C, 30 s at 55 °C, and 1 min at 72 °C), and 10 min at 72 °C). For rs4864548, a TaqMan probe (C_11821276_10) and an Applied Biosystems 7500 Real-Time PCR thermocycler were used, with 10 min at 95 °C and 40 cycles (15 s at 95 °C and 1 min at 60 °C).

### 2.4. Statistical analysis

Statistical analyses were performed at the exploratory, descriptive, and inferential levels. Inferential analyses included bivariate and multivariate analyses in a case-pseudo control design. The exploratory analysis included the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test and graphical analyses for quantitative variables for normal distribution. Descriptive representation of variables was established based on the distribution of quantitative data (mean and standard deviation for normally distributed data; median and first/third quartile for non-normally distributed data). Statistical significance was set at 0.05. Bivariate analyses included: Chi-square and Fisher Exact tests to identify possible relationships between gene polymorphisms and psychiatric phenotype; Mann-Whitney tests to identify differences on quantitative measures (like thyroid variables) between psychiatric groups, polymorphisms, and sex.

To evaluate the genetic results, three inheritance models were hypothesized for each polymorphism, performing a forward stepwise regression ([Iniesta et al., 2005](#R38); [Salas and Carracedo, 2007](#R56)) and allelic frequencies were estimated:

1.- Dominant model: Carrying one (heterozygous) or two copies (homozygous) of a certain allele is associated to the same extent with ADHD or other variables. 2.-Recessive model: Two copies of the allele are required for the association. 3.-Additive model: Each extra copy of the allele increases the probability of association by an additive dose; therefore, homozygotes for the associated allele have a higher risk than heterozygotes.

Haplotype frequencies, linkage disequilibrium (a measure of the non-random association of alleles on the same chromosome, at two regions of the CLOCK gene), and Hardy Weinberg equilibrium were calculated with Haploview 4.2 ([Barrett et al., 2005](#R7)).

We used the listwise deletion of cases with missing values as quality control, whereby five patients were excluded from the multivariate analysis.

In the logarithmic regression analysis, the dependent variable was the presence/absence of ADHD; CLOCK gene polymorphisms (rs1801260 and rs4864548), sex, chronotype, and age were considered as independent variables for multiple logistic regression analyses. For the linear regression, the BMI percentile, Sex, ADHD, chronotype, and polymorphisms were considered. The differences estimated in the bivariate analysis due to the presence/absence of ADHD were controlled by the introduction of the sex variable; therefore, different linear models were created. Nine models correspond either to rs1801260 or rs4864548 polymorphisms, separately, due to the existing linkage disequilibrium and high frequency of common haplotypes of these polymorphisms.

Analyses and data exploration were performed using the IBM SPSS 25.0.0 software (IBM Corp 64 bits edition) and R software.

## 3. Results

A sample of 347 teenagers was recruited, including 185 males and 162 females with a mean age of 13 and 14 years, respectively. Mean height was 165 and 157 cm in boys and girls, respectively. In male individuals, the mean weight/BMI were 58 kg/21.10 kg/m^2^, while in females they were 55 kg/22.7 kg/m^2^. In addition, the mean abdominal circumference was 78 cm in boys and 75 cm in females. Body fat percentage was lower (20%) in boys compared to girls (28%), as did the mean fasting cholesterol (145 mg/dl in boys versus 150 mg/dl in girls), HDL (44 mg/dl versus 47 mg/dl), LDL (83.6 mg/dl versus 83.8 mg/dl), and fasting triglycerides (87.5 mg/dl versus 92 mg/dl) (median values,25th and 75th percentiles of the whole sample are shown in [Table 1](#T1), and by ADHD in [Supplementary Table 1](#SD1)).

### Table 1.

|   | Males |  |  |  | Females |  |  |  | Total |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   | n | Md | P25 | P 75 | n | Md | P25 | P 75 | N(%) | Md |
| Age (Years) | 184 | 14.00 | 13.00 | 16.00 | 162 | 15.00 | 14.00 | 16.00 | 346(100) | 14.0 |
| Weight (Kg)* | 182 | 58.00 | 52.00 | 68.00 | 162 | 55.60 | 48.50 | 64.00 | 344 (99) | 57.0 |
| Height (m) | 182 | 1.65 | 1.60 | 1.70 | 162 | 1.57 | 1.54 | 1.60 | 344 (99) | 1.60 |
| BMI (kg/m2)* | 182 | 21.25 | 19.10 | 24.80 | 162 | 22.70 | 20.40 | 25.70 | 344 (99) | 21.90 |
| Fat percentage (%) * | 116 | 19.95 | 14.15 | 26.50 | 108 | 27.85 | 23.30 | 33.10 | 224 (64.7) | 24.60 |
| Abdominal circumference (cm) | 87 | 78.00 | 69.80 | 87.00 | 83 | 75.00 | 68.00 | 85.00 | 170 (49.1) | 76.30 |
| Fasting Glucose (mg/dL) b,* | 182 | 90.00 | 87.00 | 95.00 | 160 | 88.00 | 84.00 | 93.00 | 342 (98.8) | 90.00 |
| Cholesterol (mg/dL) b | 178 | 145.00 | 129.00 | 164.00 | 154 | 150.00 | 134.00 | 169.00 | 332 (95.5) | 147.00 |
| HDL (mg/dL ))b | 79 | 44.00 | 36.00 | 52.00 | 67 | 47.00 | 39.00 | 54.00 | 146 (42.2) | 44.50 |
| LDL (mg/dL) b | 80 | 83.60 | 68.00 | 96.80 | 68 | 83.80 | 71.00 | 100.70 | 148 (42.7) | 83.70 |
| Triglycerides (mg/dL) | 175 | 87.00 | 58.00 | 127.00 | 153 | 92.00 | 67.00 | 127.00 | 328 (94.8) | 89.50 |
| TSH (ulU/mL) | 180 | 2.03 | 1.56 | 2.79 | 160 | 2.11 | 1.35 | 2.85 | 340(98.2) | 2.08 |
| T4 (ug/dL) * | 180 | 7.76 | 6.83 | 9.09 | 160 | 8.24 | 7.44 | 8.99 | 340(98.2) | 8.09 |
| T3 (ng/dL) * | 178 | 132.00 | 115.00 | 152.00 | 159 | 123.00 | 108.00 | 142.00 | 337(97.3) | 127 |

Table 1 Caption: Sample characterization according to demographic and health measures in teenagers.a.

As shown in [Table 2](#T2), out of the total sample, 66% were diagnosed with ADHD, primarily boys (53.31%), mostly displaying a combined presentation (80.8%). In females with ADHD, the most common psychiatric comorbidity was major depressive disorder (MDD) in 61.62%, general anxiety disorder (GAD) in 29.06%, anxiety disorder not otherwise specified in 18.60%, panic disorder 16.27%, separation anxiety in 15.11%, and dysthymia in 4.65%; while in males with ADHD we found MDD in 46.15%, anxiety disorder not otherwise specified in 19.58%, GAD in 17.48%, separation anxiety in 11.88%, dysthymia in 8.39%, and panic disorder in 6.29%. Comorbidity was also common in females without ADHD; MDD was present in 89.47%, GAD in 44.73%, panic disorder in 18.42%, anxiety disorder not otherwise specified in 17.10%, separation anxiety in 10.52%, and dysthymia in 5.26%. In males without ADHD, MDD had a frequency of 73.80%, GAD 40.47%, anxiety disorder not otherwise specified in 26.19%, separation anxiety 14.28%, panic disorder 9.52% and dysthymia 4.76%.

### Table 2.

|   | ADHD** |  |  | Non-ADHD |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Malesn = 143 | Femalesn = 86 | Total N = 229 | Malesn = 42 | Femalesn = 76 | TotalN = 118 |  |
| Combined ADHD | 116 | 65 | 181 | – | – | – |
| Hyperactive ADHD | 2 | 1 | 3 | – | – | – |
| Inattentive ADHD | 26 | 20 | 46 | – | – | – |
| Major Depressive disorder | 66 | 53 | 119(55%) | 31 | 68 | 99(45%) |
| Dysthymia | 12 | 4 | 16(73%) | 2 | 4 | 6(27%) |
| Generalized anxiety disorder | 25 | 25 | 50(49%) | 17 | 34 | 51(51%) |
| Anxiety disorder not otherwise specified | 28 | 16 | 44(65%) | 11 | 13 | 24(35%) |
| Panic disorder | 9 | 14 | 23(56%) | 4 | 14 | 18(44%) |
| Separation anxiety disorder | 17 | 13 | 30(68%) | 6 | 8 | 14(32%) |
| Post-traumatic stress disorder | 6 | 7 | 13(62%) | 2 | 6 | 8(38%) |
| Oppositional defiant disorder | 105 | 59 | 164(82%) | 14 | 20 | 34(18%) |
| Conduct disorder | 33 | 22 | 55(83%) | 6 | 5 | 11(17%) |

Table 2 Caption: Frequency of Comorbid Conditions in teenagers with and without ADHD.*

No differences were found in the frequency of chronotypes between teenagers with or without ADHD (unadjusted Chi^2^ = 3.28, *P* = 0.194). However, we did find sex differences in the whole sample (unadjusted Chi^2^ = 20.45, *P* = 0–000,036), with higher frequencies of undifferentiated and morning chronotypes in boys. This sex difference was also significant in the ADHD group (unadjusted Chi^2^ = 9.35, *P* = 0.009) and in the group without ADHD (Fisher test *P* = 0.004). In girls with ADHD, the undifferentiated chronotype was the most common, present in 41 girls (53.95%), followed by the evening chronotype in 22(28.95%), and morning chronotype in 13(17.10%). In males with ADHD the undifferentiated chronotype was also the most common, in 76(66.67%), followed by the morning chronotype in 25(21.93%) and the evening chronotype in 13(11.40%). In non-ADHD females, we found 27 girls (42.86%) with undifferentiated chronotype, 22(34.92%) with the evening chronotype, and 14(22.22%) with the morning chronotype. In Non-ADHD males, the frequencies were 22(64.71%) for the undifferentiated, 10(29.41%) for the morning and 2(5.88%) for the evening chronotypes, respectively.

The genetic marker Rs1801260, at position 55435202 from the p telomere on chromosome 4, had heterozygosity of 32.5%. G was the minor allele with a frequency of 20.9%, and in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (*p* = 0.82). Rs4864548, at position 55547636, had heterozygosity of 49.6%, being A the minor allele with a frequency of 45.9%, and in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (*p* = 1.00). Genotype and allele distribution of the rs1801260 and rs4864548 markers are shown in [Table 3](#T3). Bivariate unadjusted analysis showed a significant genotype association between marker rs1801260 and ADHD. An allelic association was only observed in girls. Regarding rs4864548, genotype and allelic associations with ADHD were found for boys in a similar analysis. The most common haplotype was rs1801260/A-rs4864548/G, present in 52.9% of our sample, followed by A-A in 26.2%, G-A in 19.7%, and G-G in only 1.2%. There was a strong linkage disequilibrium between the markers (D’ = 0.89, confidence bounds from 0.66 to 0.95; r^2^ = 0.25).

### Table 3.

|   | ADHD (n = 227) |  |  | Non-ADHD n = 116 |  |  | Total n = 343 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Rs1801260 Genotypes | Malen(%) | Femalen(%) | Totaln(%) | Malen(%) | Femalen(%) | Totaln(%) | n(%) |
| AA | 88 (61.97) | 59 (69.41) | 147 (64.76) a | 28 (68.29) | 41 (54.67) | 69 (59.48) a | 216 (62.97) |
| AG | 50 (35.21) | 24 (28.24) | 74 (32.60) a | 10 (24.39) | 27 (36) | 37 (31.90) a | 111 (32.36) |
| GG | 4 (2.82) | 2 (2.35) | 6 (2.64) a | 3 (7.32) | 7 (9.33) | 10 (8.62) a | 16 (4.67) |
| Alleles |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| A | 226 (79.58) | 142 (83.53) b | 368 (81.06) | 66 (80.49) | 109 (72.67) b | 175 (75.43) | 543 (79.15) |
| G | 58 (20.42) | 28 (16.47) b | 86 (18.94) | 16 (19.51) | 41 (27.33) b | 57 (24.57) | 143 (20.85) |

Table 3 Caption: Genotype and allele frequencies of rs1801260 and rs4864548 in teenagers with ADHD and without ADHD.

The logarithmic regression analysis showed a significant association (*P* < 0.001) between rs1801260 and the presence of ADHD. In addition, when 342 participants were included, we confirmed that there is an association between ADHD and the AA and AG genotypes of rs1801260 (dominant model for allele A) with an OR = 3.27, 95% confidence interval 1.14–10.17 (*p* < 0.001), adjusting for sex and age. No statistical or clinical relevance was detected when the models were adjusted by other variables such as, BMI percentile and thyroid function values.

The frequency of haplotype rs1801260/A-rs4864548/G was 55.5% in individuals with ADHD and 48% in the comparison group (Chi2 = 3.53, *P* = 0.06); the rest of the haplotypes were more common in individuals without ADHD, but this difference was not statistically significant (*P* ≥ 0.1). In addition, linkage disequilibrium between both markers was stronger in individuals with ADHD (D’ = 0.91, confidence bounds of 0.78 to 0.97, R2 = 0.25) than in individuals without ADHD (D’ = 0.86, confidence bounds of 0.66 to 0.95, R2 = 0.23).

There were no metabolic differences between teenagers with ADHD and without ADHD. However, T3 levels were higher in the group of ADHD. Analysis by sex also showed differences between these groups ([Table 1](#T1)). When the whole sample, regardless of the presence or not of ADHD, was analyzed, significant differences were found in the T3 levels by sex, which were 9.73 ± 3.78 ng/dl higher in male probands than in females (*p* = 0.001), and the T4 levels were 0.62 ± 0.24 ug/dl higher in females than in males (*P* < 0.04). In the linear regression, the mean of T3 and T4 values were respectively 10 units (95% CI 3.07–17.77 units) and 0.58 units (95% CI, 0.11–1.04) lower in females than in males, with a mean of 0.134 units increase in BMI percentile (95% CI 0.01–0.26 units) in females when compared to males. There were no significant differences in TSH according to ADHD and sex (*p* > 0.05).

## 4. Discussion

Although many reports have associated ADHD susceptibility to various biological, social, and environmental phenomena, these aspects have been addressed in isolation. In this comprehensive study we sought to analyze a broader ADHD phenotype in Mexican teenagers and its possible association with two CLOCK gene polymorphisms, taking into consideration clinical-psychiatric profiles, circadian preferences, thyroid function, and metabolic markers. Our most significant result was that allele A of the rs1801260 polymorphism is associated with ADHD, as previously reported in other populations ([Carpena et al., 2019](#R16); [Kissling et al., 2008](#R40); [Schuch et al., 2018](#R58); [Xu et al., 2010](#R67)) but now reported in Mexican teenagers. The association was confirmed with a dominant model between ADHD and the AA/AG genotypes of rs1801260. Earlier clinical studies were conducted mainly in males with ADHD and linked the chronotype with the CLOCK gene, specifically the rs1801260 polymorphism in ADHD and non-ADHD samples ([Carpena et al., 2019](#R16); [Kissling et al., 2008](#R40); [Meng et al., 2020](#R50); [Xu et al., 2010](#R67)). In contrast, our sample provides a broader representation of the ADHD teenager population. There was a larger proportion of girls when compared to other studies, and the fact that a bivariate analysis showed a higher frequency of allele A in girls with ADHD could imply a possible role of rs1801260 in both boys and girls.

We did not find an association between rs1801260, and thyroid function or conditions associated with MetS. A recent systematic review and meta-analysis showed that, although marker rs1801260 was associated with MetS risk in Asian samples, it was not associated in Caucasians or Hispanics ([Škrlec et al., 2021](#R62)).

Among populations, the most common allele for marker RS1801260 is A, with a frequency as high as 93.2% in Han Chinese in Beijing and 92.9% in Southern Han Chinese, and as low as 54% in a sample of Gujarati Indians in Houston and 58.1% in Finish. The frequency in our sample (81.1% in the ADHD group and 75.4% in the comparison group) was close to the frequency in individuals with Mexican ancestry in Los Angeles, California (71.9%) ([Auton et al., 2015](#R6)). The ancestral allele A of the Rs1801260 or a genetic variant close to it may have been evolutionarily favorable or simply has not been selected against. An alternative hypothesis is that allele G of the same marker or a variant nearby could have a protective effect against ADHD. Indeed, allele A has been associated with ADHD using different methods. For example, an increased transmission of Allele A from parents to children/adolescents with ADHD was identified in a sample from Taiwan ([Xu et al., 2010](#R67)).

Other common variants have been associated with ADHD in children, such as the 10-repeat allele of the 40-base pair polymorphism at the 3′UTR region of the dopamine transporter gene, SLC6A3 ([Grünblatt et al., 2019](#R36)) or the 7-repeat allele of the 48-base pair polymorphism in exon 3 of the dopamine receptor 4 gene, DRD4 ([Bonvicini et al., 2020](#R13)). A hypothesis stated that long alleles of the DRD4 gene were selected because they could have adaptive value in migratory societies characterized by novelty-seeking personality, hyperactivity, and risk-taking behaviors, traits that we can clinically see and measure in the ADHD population. In a genomic analysis of the natural history of ADHD using Homo neanderthalensis and ancient Homo sapiens samples, it was found that the ancestral allele tended to be the risk variant (significant at *p* ≤ 1–8) ([Esteller-Cucala et al., 2020](#R29)).

We suggest that the once-adaptive components of ADHD nowadays could become problematic in highly structured societies, and these characteristics could no longer be considered adaptive and valuable. Furthermore, it could lead to chrono- and metabolic disruptions and be a response to those changes in environments. For example, it has been suggested that Homo neanderthalensis had higher daily energy requirements than Homo sapiens ([Froehle and Churchill, 2009](#R32)). The International Study of Childhood Obesity, Lifestyle, and the Environment (ISCOLE) reported the correlates of obesity and lifestyle behaviors in individuals, their locality and schools confirming epidemiological transitions in obesity and physical activity, but not for other variables ([Katzmarzyk et al., 2019](#R39)). In countries such as Mexico, there is evidence of a nutritional transition from a mainly plant-based diet to a highly caloric and poor in nutrients diet ([Roman et al., 2013](#R55)).

Regarding haplotype analysis, the strong linkage disequilibrium between rs1801260 and rs4864548 indicates that their alleles are very frequently co-inherited, especially in the group of teenagers with ADHD, which should be further investigated. Different circadian genes may be involved in ADHD or in metabolic conditions associated with ADHD. In Han Chinese children, ADHD was found to be associated with a combined effect of variants of PER1, ARNTL2, and NR1D1 circadian genes ([Wang et al., 2020](#R64)). In addition, metabolic phenotypes such as diabetes, have been associated with PER2 circadian genes in Mexican samples ([Below et al., 2011](#R8)). CLOCK genes interact with each other, suggesting that variation in different CLOCK genes could be linked with molecular changes associated with ADHD and metabolic phenotypes. Future research in larger samples will help increase our knowledge about the precise implications of these results. Circadian/sleep disorders have been linked to body weight regulation in animal models ([Schuch et al., 2018](#R58)), and in human ADHD or non-ADHD-related pathophysiology ([Ciarleglio et al., 2008](#R19); [Serretti et al., 2003](#R60); [Yadav et al., 2021](#R68)).

An important role of CLOCK in neuronal function, mainly in the dopamine output regulation, has been shown ([Faraone et al., 2005](#R31); [Groenman et al., 2016](#R35); [Klein et al., 2017](#R41); [Yadav et al., 2021](#R68)). Therefore, dopamine-related medication such as methylphenidate, atomoxetine, and amphetamines, could be related to the expression of the CLOCK gene and the circadian system regulation in ADHD ([Coogan and McGowan, 2017](#R20); [Meng et al., 2020](#R50); [Weiss and Salpekar, 2010](#R65); [Yadav et al., 2021](#R68)). The rs1801260 polymorphism has also been associated with Bipolar Disorder, MDD, and schizophrenia ([Benedetti et al., 2003](#R9); [Lee et al., 2010](#R47); [Serretti et al., 2003](#R60); [Zhang et al., 2011](#R70)) However, no association between this polymorphism and depression was found in Mexican adults ([Calati et al., 2010](#R15)).

Regarding chronotypes, modifiable and non-modifiable factors such as age have been linked as important determinants. In children, the morning chronotype is more prevalent, with a shift towards eveningness being observed during puberty. By contrast, a shift towards morningness is seen around middle age ([Adan and Natale, 2002](#R3); [Paine et al., 2006](#R53)). Higher rates of evening chronotype were also previously found in children and adults with ADHD ([Coogan and McGowan, 2017](#R20)), but others suggested that the association was only clear in adults. We found that the undifferentiated chronotype was the most common in teenagers with or without ADHD, especially in boys, which was also reported in a sample from Spain ([Martinez-Cayuelas et al., 2022](#R48)) as same as Mexican sample of adults with depression ([Calati et al., 2010](#R15)). However, we could not replicate an association between ADHD and the evening chronotype, but we confirmed differences by sex in a bivariate analysis. It is possible that the sex distribution (with a higher number of girls in the non-ADHD group) and the fact that girls were older than boys influenced the lack of association between ADHD and the evening chronotype. In addition, there may have been a selection bias in our sample, if girls who seek attention at a tertiary care unit are relatively older and have more severe symptoms than boys.

The chronotype may also be affected by other aspects such as those related to modern life. Additional research with larger subgroups by age may take into consideration other biological and environmental factors and standardized criteria to determine chronotypes in teenagers, in well-characterized ADHD samples in specific populations.

Conditions associated with MetS did not vary according to the presence of ADHD. Although we found differences in thyroid T3 levels between the ADHD and non-ADHD groups, the sex differences may explain this result. As well, differences by sex in T3 and T4 were also found in German children, with a positive association between the functional fraction of T3 (fT3) and ADHD symptoms (*β* = 0.08; 95% CI 0.03–0.14) ([Albrecht et al., 2020](#R4)), closely related to the fT3 difference of 0.4 ± 0.5 pg/mL between overweight children with and without ADHD found in a similar population ([Langrock et al., 2018](#R46)). We found an association between the thyroid function test and the BMI percentile, but this was not strong enough to support a clinical or laboratory phenotype as previously suggested ([Carpena et al., 2019](#R16); [Kissling et al., 2008](#R40); [Meng et al., 2020](#R50); [Xu et al., 2010](#R67)). Well-defined studies on clinical and laboratory assessments in healthy and psychiatric conditions may be needed.

In conclusion, in our sample of Mexican teenagers, allele A of Rs1801260 CLOCK polymorphism was associated with ADHD, however we were unable to fully determine its impact on metabolic conditions likely due to our limited sample size. This supports the need for further studies to better elucidate the complex pathophysiology of ADHD and how the environment could be influencing its expressed characteristics.

## 5. Limitations

We recognize that a cross-sectional design limits the interpretation of the clinical and metabolic values since we cannot establish causality and severity between the studied variables. Given that these teenagers are from a clinical sample from a tertiary-care institution, the results are not generalizable. The differences of these values among the diverse ethnic groups in the world are well known ([Ciarleglio et al., 2008](#R19)). Our study was likely underpowered to detect small to moderate changes. Lastly, as for the precision and interpretation of the anthropometric, clinical and laboratory characteristics, we are faced with the controversial lack of reference values specific to our Mexican pediatric population, however, recent efforts of our local scientific community are being made ([Costa-Urrutia et al., 2019](#R23)), and we are looking to incorporate these into our future work.

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the research participants, José Octavio Hernández Lagunas, clinical and research staff, as well as the PROM-ETHEO group at the Instituto Nacional de Psiquiatría Ramón de la Fuente Muñiz in México City for their valuable time, help, and support.

### Funding

This research did not receive any specific grant funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

## Footnotes

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Supplementary Materials

### Supplementary Materials

## References

1. American Psychiatric Association, 1994. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental disorders: DSM-IV, 4th ed. American Psychiatric Publishing Inc, Arlington, VA, US.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Diagnostic%20and%20Statistical%20Manual%20of%20Mental%20disorders:%20DSM-IV&publication_year=1994&)

2. American Psychiatric Association, 2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-5. American Psychiatric Association, Washington, D.C.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Diagnostic%20and%20Statistical%20Manual%20of%20Mental%20Disorders:%20DSM-5&publication_year=2013&)

3. Adan A, Natale V, 2002. Gender differences in morningness-eveningness preference. Chronobiol. Int 19 (4), 709–720.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1081/cbi-120005390) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12182498/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Chronobiol.%20Int&title=Gender%20differences%20in%20morningness-eveningness%20preference&author=A%20Adan&author=V%20Natale&volume=19&issue=4&publication_year=2002&pages=709-720&pmid=12182498&doi=10.1081/cbi-120005390&)

4. Albrecht D, Ittermann T, Thamm M, Grabe HJ, Bahls M, Völzke H, 2020. Thë association between thyroid function biomarkers and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Sci. Rep 10 (1), 18285.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-75228-w) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7588469/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33106555/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sci.%20Rep&title=Th%C3%AB%20association%20between%20thyroid%20function%20biomarkers%20and%20attention%20deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder&author=D%20Albrecht&author=T%20Ittermann&author=M%20Thamm&author=HJ%20Grabe&author=M%20Bahls&volume=10&issue=1&publication_year=2020&pages=18285&pmid=33106555&doi=10.1038/s41598-020-75228-w&)

5. Angelousi A, Kassi E, Nasiri-Ansari N, Weickert MO, Randeva H, Kaltsas G, 2018. Clock genes alterations and endocrine disorders. Eur. J. Clin. Invest 48 (6), e12927.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/eci.12927) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29577261/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur.%20J.%20Clin.%20Invest&title=Clock%20genes%20alterations%20and%20endocrine%20disorders&author=A%20Angelousi&author=E%20Kassi&author=N%20Nasiri-Ansari&author=MO%20Weickert&author=H%20Randeva&volume=48&issue=6&publication_year=2018&pages=e12927&pmid=29577261&doi=10.1111/eci.12927&)

6. Auton A, Brooks LD, Durbin RM, Garrison EP, Kang HM, Korbel JO, Marchini JL, McCarthy S, McVean GA, Abecasis GR, 2015. A global reference for human genetic variation. Nature 526 (7571), 68–74.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature15393) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4750478/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26432245/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=A%20global%20reference%20for%20human%20genetic%20variation&author=A%20Auton&author=LD%20Brooks&author=RM%20Durbin&author=EP%20Garrison&author=HM%20Kang&volume=526&issue=7571&publication_year=2015&pages=68-74&pmid=26432245&doi=10.1038/nature15393&)

7. Barrett JC, Fry B, Maller J, Daly MJ, 2005. Haploview: analysis and visualization of LD and haplotype maps. Bioinformatics 21 (2), 263–265.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bth457) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15297300/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=Haploview:%20analysis%20and%20visualization%20of%20LD%20and%20haplotype%20maps&author=JC%20Barrett&author=B%20Fry&author=J%20Maller&author=MJ%20Daly&volume=21&issue=2&publication_year=2005&pages=263-265&pmid=15297300&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/bth457&)

8. Below JE, Gamazon ER, Morrison JV, Konkashbaev A, Pluzhnikov A, McKeigue PM, Parra EJ, Elbein SC, Hallman DM, Nicolae DL, Bell GI, Cruz M, Cox NJ, Hanis CL, 2011. Genome-wide association and meta-analysis in populations from Starr County, Texas, and Mexico City identify type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci and enrichment for expression quantitative trait loci in top signals. Diabetologia 54 (8), 2047–2055.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-011-2188-3) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3761075/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21647700/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetologia&title=Genome-wide%20association%20and%20meta-analysis%20in%20populations%20from%20Starr%20County,%20Texas,%20and%20Mexico%20City%20identify%20type%202%20diabetes%20susceptibility%20loci%20and%20enrichment%20for%20expression%20quantitative%20trait%20loci%20in%20top%20signals&author=JE%20Below&author=ER%20Gamazon&author=JV%20Morrison&author=A%20Konkashbaev&author=A%20Pluzhnikov&volume=54&issue=8&publication_year=2011&pages=2047-2055&pmid=21647700&doi=10.1007/s00125-011-2188-3&)

9. Benedetti F, Serretti A, Colombo C, Barbini B, Lorenzi C, Campori E, Smeraldi E, 2003. Influence of CLOCK gene polymorphism on circadian mood fluctuation and illness recurrence in bipolar depression. Am. J. Med. Genet. B Neuropsychiatr. Genet 123b (1), 23–26.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.b.20038) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14582141/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Med.%20Genet.%20B%20Neuropsychiatr.%20Genet&title=Influence%20of%20CLOCK%20gene%20polymorphism%20on%20circadian%20mood%20fluctuation%20and%20illness%20recurrence%20in%20bipolar%20depression&author=F%20Benedetti&author=A%20Serretti&author=C%20Colombo&author=B%20Barbini&author=C%20Lorenzi&volume=123b&issue=1&publication_year=2003&pages=23-26&pmid=14582141&doi=10.1002/ajmg.b.20038&)

10. Benjet C, Borges G, Medina-Mora ME, Zambrano J, Aguilar-Gaxiola S, 2009. Youth mental health in a populous city of the developing world: results from the Mexican adolescent mental health survey. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 50 (4), 386–395.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.2008.01962.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19040499/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Child%20Psychol.%20Psychiatry&title=Youth%20mental%20health%20in%20a%20populous%20city%20of%20the%20developing%20world:%20results%20from%20the%20Mexican%20adolescent%20mental%20health%20survey&author=C%20Benjet&author=G%20Borges&author=ME%20Medina-Mora&author=J%20Zambrano&author=S%20Aguilar-Gaxiola&volume=50&issue=4&publication_year=2009&pages=386-395&pmid=19040499&doi=10.1111/j.1469-7610.2008.01962.x&)

11. Benjet C, Borges G, Méndez E, Albor Y, Casanova L, Orozco R, Curiel T, Fleiz C, Medina-Mora ME, 2016. Eight-year incidence of psychiatric disorders and service use from adolescence to early adulthood: longitudinal follow-up of the Mexican adolescent mental health survey. Eur. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 25 (2), 163–173.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00787-015-0721-5) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26009150/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur.%20Child%20Adolesc.%20Psychiatry&title=Eight-year%20incidence%20of%20psychiatric%20disorders%20and%20service%20use%20from%20adolescence%20to%20early%20adulthood:%20longitudinal%20follow-up%20of%20the%20Mexican%20adolescent%20mental%20health%20survey&author=C%20Benjet&author=G%20Borges&author=E%20M%C3%A9ndez&author=Y%20Albor&author=L%20Casanova&volume=25&issue=2&publication_year=2016&pages=163-173&pmid=26009150&doi=10.1007/s00787-015-0721-5&)

12. Bijlenga D, Vollebregt MA, Kooij JJS, Arns M, 2019. The role of the circadian system in the etiology and pathophysiology of ADHD: time to redefine ADHD? Atten. Deficit Hyperact. Disord 11 (1), 5–19.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12402-018-0271-z) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30927228/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Atten.%20Deficit%20Hyperact.%20Disord&title=The%20role%20of%20the%20circadian%20system%20in%20the%20etiology%20and%20pathophysiology%20of%20ADHD:%20time%20to%20redefine%20ADHD?&author=D%20Bijlenga&author=MA%20Vollebregt&author=JJS%20Kooij&author=M%20Arns&volume=11&issue=1&publication_year=2019&pages=5-19&pmid=30927228&doi=10.1007/s12402-018-0271-z&)

13. Bonvicini C, Cortese S, Maj C, Baune BT, Faraone SV, Scassellati C, 2020. DRD4 48 bp multiallelic variants as age-population-specific biomarkers in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Transl. Psychiatry 10 (1), 70.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-020-0755-4) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7031506/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32075956/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Transl.%20Psychiatry&title=DRD4%2048%20bp%20multiallelic%20variants%20as%20age-population-specific%20biomarkers%20in%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder&author=C%20Bonvicini&author=S%20Cortese&author=C%20Maj&author=BT%20Baune&author=SV%20Faraone&volume=10&issue=1&publication_year=2020&pages=70&pmid=32075956&doi=10.1038/s41398-020-0755-4&)

14. Buijs RM, Soto Tinoco EC, Hurtado Alvarado G, Escobar C, 2021. The circadian system: from clocks to physiology. Handb. Clin. Neurol 179, 233–247.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-819975-6.00013-3) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34225965/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Handb.%20Clin.%20Neurol&title=The%20circadian%20system:%20from%20clocks%20to%20physiology&author=RM%20Buijs&author=EC%20Soto%20Tinoco&author=G%20Hurtado%20Alvarado&author=C%20Escobar&volume=179&publication_year=2021&pages=233-247&pmid=34225965&doi=10.1016/B978-0-12-819975-6.00013-3&)

15. Calati R, Gaspar-Barba E, Yukler A, Serretti A, 2010. T3111C clock single nucleotide polymorphism and mood disorders: a meta-analysis. Chronobiol. Int 27 (4), 706–721.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3109/07420521003681480) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20560707/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Chronobiol.%20Int&title=T3111C%20clock%20single%20nucleotide%20polymorphism%20and%20mood%20disorders:%20a%20meta-analysis&author=R%20Calati&author=E%20Gaspar-Barba&author=A%20Yukler&author=A%20Serretti&volume=27&issue=4&publication_year=2010&pages=706-721&pmid=20560707&doi=10.3109/07420521003681480&)

16. Carpena MX, Hutz MH, Salatino-Oliveira A, Polanczyk GV, Zeni C, Schmitz M, Chazan R, Genro JP, Rohde LA, Tovo-Rodrigues L, 2019. CLOCK polymorphisms in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): further Evidence Linking Sleep And Circadian Disturbances And ADHD. Genes 10 (2), 1–13. 10.3390/genes10020088 (Basel).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes10020088) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6410065/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30696097/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genes&title=CLOCK%20polymorphisms%20in%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder%20(ADHD):%20further%20Evidence%20Linking%20Sleep%20And%20Circadian%20Disturbances%20And%20ADHD&author=MX%20Carpena&author=MH%20Hutz&author=A%20Salatino-Oliveira&author=GV%20Polanczyk&author=C%20Zeni&volume=10&issue=2&publication_year=2019&pages=1-13&pmid=30696097&doi=10.3390/genes10020088&)

17. Chen Q, Hartman CA, Haavik J, Harro J, Klungsøyr K, Hegvik TA, Wanders R, Ottosen C, Dalsgaard S, Faraone SV, Larsson H, 2018. Common psychiatric and metabolic comorbidity of adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a population-based cross-sectional study. PLoS One 13 (9), e0204516.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0204516) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6157884/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30256837/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20One&title=Common%20psychiatric%20and%20metabolic%20comorbidity%20of%20adult%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder:%20a%20population-based%20cross-sectional%20study&author=Q%20Chen&author=CA%20Hartman&author=J%20Haavik&author=J%20Harro&author=K%20Klungs%C3%B8yr&volume=13&issue=9&publication_year=2018&pages=e0204516&pmid=30256837&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0204516&)

18. Chu SY, Jung JH, Park MJ, Kim SH, 2019. Risk assessment of metabolic syndrome in adolescents using the triglyceride/high-density lipoprotein cholesterol ratio and the total cholesterol/high-density lipoprotein cholesterol ratio. Ann. Pediatr. Endocrinol. Metab 24 (1), 41–48.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.6065/apem.2019.24.1.41) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6449623/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30943679/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann.%20Pediatr.%20Endocrinol.%20Metab&title=Risk%20assessment%20of%20metabolic%20syndrome%20in%20adolescents%20using%20the%20triglyceride/high-density%20lipoprotein%20cholesterol%20ratio%20and%20the%20total%20cholesterol/high-density%20lipoprotein%20cholesterol%20ratio&author=SY%20Chu&author=JH%20Jung&author=MJ%20Park&author=SH%20Kim&volume=24&issue=1&publication_year=2019&pages=41-48&pmid=30943679&doi=10.6065/apem.2019.24.1.41&)

19. Ciarleglio CM, Ryckman KK, Servick SV, Hida A, Robbins S, Wells N, Hicks J, Larson SA, Wiedermann JP, Carver K, Hamilton N, Kidd KK, Kidd JR, Smith JR, Friedlaender J, McMahon DG, Williams SM, Summar ML, Johnson CH, 2008. Genetic differences in human circadian clock genes among worldwide populations. J. Biol. Rhythms 23 (4), 330–340.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1177/0748730408320284) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2579796/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18663240/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biol.%20Rhythms&title=Genetic%20differences%20in%20human%20circadian%20clock%20genes%20among%20worldwide%20populations&author=CM%20Ciarleglio&author=KK%20Ryckman&author=SV%20Servick&author=A%20Hida&author=S%20Robbins&volume=23&issue=4&publication_year=2008&pages=330-340&pmid=18663240&doi=10.1177/0748730408320284&)

20. Coogan AN, McGowan NM, 2017. A systematic review of circadian function, chronotype and chronotherapy in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Atten. Deficit Hyperact. Disord 9 (3), 129–147.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12402-016-0214-5) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28064405/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Atten.%20Deficit%20Hyperact.%20Disord&title=A%20systematic%20review%20of%20circadian%20function,%20chronotype%20and%20chronotherapy%20in%20attention%20deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder&author=AN%20Coogan&author=NM%20McGowan&volume=9&issue=3&publication_year=2017&pages=129-147&pmid=28064405&doi=10.1007/s12402-016-0214-5&)

21. Cortese S, Faraone SV, Konofal E, Lecendreux M, 2009. Sleep in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: meta-analysis of subjective and objective studies. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 48 (9), 894–908.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/CHI.0b013e3181ac09c9) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19625983/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Am.%20Acad.%20Child%20Adolesc.%20Psychiatry&title=Sleep%20in%20children%20with%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder:%20meta-analysis%20of%20subjective%20and%20objective%20studies&author=S%20Cortese&author=SV%20Faraone&author=E%20Konofal&author=M%20Lecendreux&volume=48&issue=9&publication_year=2009&pages=894-908&pmid=19625983&doi=10.1097/CHI.0b013e3181ac09c9&)

22. Cortese S, Moreira-Maia CR, St Fleur D, Morcillo-Peñalver C, Rohde LA, Faraone SV, 2016. Association between ADHD and obesity: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am. J. Psychiatry 173 (1), 34–43.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2015.15020266) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26315982/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Psychiatry&title=Association%20between%20ADHD%20and%20obesity:%20a%20systematic%20review%20and%20meta-analysis&author=S%20Cortese&author=CR%20Moreira-Maia&author=D%20St%20Fleur&author=C%20Morcillo-Pe%C3%B1alver&author=LA%20Rohde&volume=173&issue=1&publication_year=2016&pages=34-43&pmid=26315982&doi=10.1176/appi.ajp.2015.15020266&)

23. Costa-Urrutia P, Vizuet-Gámez A, Ramirez-Alcántara M, Guillen-González M, Medina-Contreras O, Valdes-Moreno M, Musalem-Younes C, Solares-Tlapechco J, Granados J, Franco-Trecu V, Rodriguez-Arellano ME, 2019. Obesity measured as percent body fat, relationship with body mass index, and percentile curves for Mexican pediatric population. PLoS One 14 (2), e0212792.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0212792) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6388924/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30802270/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20One&title=Obesity%20measured%20as%20percent%20body%20fat,%20relationship%20with%20body%20mass%20index,%20and%20percentile%20curves%20for%20Mexican%20pediatric%20population&author=P%20Costa-Urrutia&author=A%20Vizuet-G%C3%A1mez&author=M%20Ramirez-Alc%C3%A1ntara&author=M%20Guillen-Gonz%C3%A1lez&author=O%20Medina-Contreras&volume=14&issue=2&publication_year=2019&pages=e0212792&pmid=30802270&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0212792&)

24. Dalsgaard S, Østergaard SD, Leckman JF, Mortensen PB, Pedersen MG, 2015. Mortality in children, adolescents, and adults with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a nationwide cohort study. Lancet 385 (9983), 2190–2196.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61684-6) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25726514/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Lancet&title=Mortality%20in%20children,%20adolescents,%20and%20adults%20with%20attention%20deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder:%20a%20nationwide%20cohort%20study&author=S%20Dalsgaard&author=SD%20%C3%98stergaard&author=JF%20Leckman&author=PB%20Mortensen&author=MG%20Pedersen&volume=385&issue=9983&publication_year=2015&pages=2190-2196&pmid=25726514&doi=10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61684-6&)

25. De la Peña F, CJ PL, Ulloa R, 2005. Validity of Mexican modified childrens brief psychiatric rating scale (BPRS-C-25). In: Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. Toronto, Canada.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?De%20la%20Pe%C3%B1a%20F,%20CJ%20PL,%20Ulloa%20R,%202005.%20Validity%20of%20Mexican%20modified%20childrens%20brief%20psychiatric%20rating%20scale%20(BPRS-C-25).%20In:%20Proceedings%20of%20the%20Annual%20Meeting%20of%20the%20American%20Academy%20of%20Child%20and%20Adolescent%20Psychiatry.%20Toronto,%20Canada.)

26. Díaz-Morales JF, de León MC, Sorroche MG, 2007. Validity of the morningness-eveningness scale for children among spanish adolescents. Chronobiol. Int 24 (3), 435–447.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/07420520701420659) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17612943/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Chronobiol.%20Int&title=Validity%20of%20the%20morningness-eveningness%20scale%20for%20children%20among%20spanish%20adolescents&author=JF%20D%C3%ADaz-Morales&author=MC%20de%20Le%C3%B3n&author=MG%20Sorroche&volume=24&issue=3&publication_year=2007&pages=435-447&pmid=17612943&doi=10.1080/07420520701420659&)

27. Díaz-Morales JF, Escribano C, 2013. Circadian preference and thinking styles: implications for school achievement. Chronobiol. Int 30 (10), 1231–1239.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3109/07420528.2013.813854) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24024592/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Chronobiol.%20Int&title=Circadian%20preference%20and%20thinking%20styles:%20implications%20for%20school%20achievement&author=JF%20D%C3%ADaz-Morales&author=C%20Escribano&volume=30&issue=10&publication_year=2013&pages=1231-1239&pmid=24024592&doi=10.3109/07420528.2013.813854&)

28. Drover SSM, Villanger GD, Aase H, Skogheim TS, Longnecker MP, Zoeller RT, Reichborn-Kjennerud T, Knudsen GP, Zeiner P, Engel SM, 2019. Maternal thyroid function during pregnancy or neonatal thyroid function and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a systematic review. Epidemiology 30 (1), 130–144.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/EDE.0000000000000937) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6359926/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30299402/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Epidemiology&title=Maternal%20thyroid%20function%20during%20pregnancy%20or%20neonatal%20thyroid%20function%20and%20attention%20deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder:%20a%20systematic%20review&author=SSM%20Drover&author=GD%20Villanger&author=H%20Aase&author=TS%20Skogheim&author=MP%20Longnecker&volume=30&issue=1&publication_year=2019&pages=130-144&pmid=30299402&doi=10.1097/EDE.0000000000000937&)

29. Esteller-Cucala P, Maceda I, Børglum AD, Demontis D, Faraone SV, Cormand B, Lao O, 2020. Genomic analysis of the natural history of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder using Neanderthal and ancient Homo sapiens samples. Sci. Rep 10 (1), 8622.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-65322-4) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7248073/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32451437/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sci.%20Rep&title=Genomic%20analysis%20of%20the%20natural%20history%20of%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder%20using%20Neanderthal%20and%20ancient%20Homo%20sapiens%20samples&author=P%20Esteller-Cucala&author=I%20Maceda&author=AD%20B%C3%B8rglum&author=D%20Demontis&author=SV%20Faraone&volume=10&issue=1&publication_year=2020&pages=8622&pmid=32451437&doi=10.1038/s41598-020-65322-4&)

30. Expert panel on integrated guidelines for cardiovascular health and risk reduction in children and adolescents: summary report. Pediatrics 128 (Suppl 5), 2011, S213–S256. 10.1542/peds.2009-2107C. Suppl 5.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2009-2107C) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4536582/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22084329/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pediatrics&title=Expert%20panel%20on%20integrated%20guidelines%20for%20cardiovascular%20health%20and%20risk%20reduction%20in%20children%20and%20adolescents:%20summary%20report&volume=128&issue=Suppl%205&publication_year=2011&pages=S213-S256&pmid=22084329&doi=10.1542/peds.2009-2107C&)

31. Faraone SV, Perlis RH, Doyle AE, Smoller JW, Goralnick JJ, Holmgren MA, Sklar P, 2005. Molecular genetics of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 57 (11), 1313–1323.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.11.024) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15950004/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biol.%20Psychiatry&title=Molecular%20genetics%20of%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder&author=SV%20Faraone&author=RH%20Perlis&author=AE%20Doyle&author=JW%20Smoller&author=JJ%20Goralnick&volume=57&issue=11&publication_year=2005&pages=1313-1323&pmid=15950004&doi=10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.11.024&)

32. Froehle AW, Churchill ER, 2009. Energetic competition between Neandertals and Anatomically modern humans. PaleoAnthropology 96–116.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PaleoAnthropology&title=Energetic%20competition%20between%20Neandertals%20and%20Anatomically%20modern%20humans&author=AW%20Froehle&author=ER%20Churchill&publication_year=2009&pages=96-116&)

33. Ghassabian A, Bongers-Schokking JJ, Henrichs J, Jaddoe VW, Visser TJ, Visser W, de Muinck Keizer-Schrama SM, Hooijkaas H, Steegers EA, Hofman A, Verhulst FC, van der Ende J, de Rijke YB, Tiemeier H, 2011. Maternal thyroid function during pregnancy and behavioral problems in the offspring: the generation R study. Pediatr. Res 69 (5 Pt 1), 454–459.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1203/PDR.0b013e3182125b0c) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21471776/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pediatr.%20Res&title=Maternal%20thyroid%20function%20during%20pregnancy%20and%20behavioral%20problems%20in%20the%20offspring:%20the%20generation%20R%20study&author=A%20Ghassabian&author=JJ%20Bongers-Schokking&author=J%20Henrichs&author=VW%20Jaddoe&author=TJ%20Visser&volume=69&issue=5%20Pt%201&publication_year=2011&pages=454-459&pmid=21471776&doi=10.1203/PDR.0b013e3182125b0c&)

34. Grimm O, Kranz TM, Reif A, 2020. Genetics of ADHD: what should the clinician know? Curr. Psychiatry Rep 22 (4), 18.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11920-020-1141-x) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7046577/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32108282/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr.%20Psychiatry%20Rep&title=Genetics%20of%20ADHD:%20what%20should%20the%20clinician%20know?&author=O%20Grimm&author=TM%20Kranz&author=A%20Reif&volume=22&issue=4&publication_year=2020&pages=18&pmid=32108282&doi=10.1007/s11920-020-1141-x&)

35. Groenman AP, Greven CU, van Donkelaar MM, Schellekens A, van Hulzen KJ, Rommelse N, Hartman CA, Hoekstra PJ, Luman M, Franke B, Faraone SV, Oosterlaan J, Buitelaar JK, 2016. Dopamine and serotonin genetic risk scores predicting substance and nicotine use in attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Addict. Biol 21 (4), 915–923.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/adb.12230) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4561224/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25752199/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Addict.%20Biol&title=Dopamine%20and%20serotonin%20genetic%20risk%20scores%20predicting%20substance%20and%20nicotine%20use%20in%20attention%20deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder&author=AP%20Groenman&author=CU%20Greven&author=MM%20van%20Donkelaar&author=A%20Schellekens&author=KJ%20van%20Hulzen&volume=21&issue=4&publication_year=2016&pages=915-923&pmid=25752199&doi=10.1111/adb.12230&)

36. Grünblatt E, Werling AM, Roth A, Romanos M, Walitza S, 2019. Association study and a systematic meta-analysis of the VNTR polymorphism in the 3′-UTR of dopamine transporter gene and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. J. Neural Transm 126 (4), 517–529 (Vienna).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-019-01998-x) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6456487/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30923918/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Neural%20Transm&title=Association%20study%20and%20a%20systematic%20meta-analysis%20of%20the%20VNTR%20polymorphism%20in%20the%203%E2%80%B2-UTR%20of%20dopamine%20transporter%20gene%20and%20attention-deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder&author=E%20Gr%C3%BCnblatt&author=AM%20Werling&author=A%20Roth&author=M%20Romanos&author=S%20Walitza&volume=126&issue=4&publication_year=2019&pages=517-529&pmid=30923918&doi=10.1007/s00702-019-01998-x&)

37. Ikegami K, Refetoff S, Van Cauter E, Yoshimura T, 2019. Interconnection between circadian clocks and thyroid function. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol 15 (10), 590–600.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41574-019-0237-z) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7288350/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31406343/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Rev.%20Endocrinol&title=Interconnection%20between%20circadian%20clocks%20and%20thyroid%20function&author=K%20Ikegami&author=S%20Refetoff&author=E%20Van%20Cauter&author=T%20Yoshimura&volume=15&issue=10&publication_year=2019&pages=590-600&pmid=31406343&doi=10.1038/s41574-019-0237-z&)

38. Iniesta R, Guinó E, Moreno V, 2005. Análisis estadístico de polimorfismos genéticos en estudios epidemiológicos. Gac. Sanit 19 (4), 333–341.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1157/13078029) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16050971/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gac.%20Sanit&title=An%C3%A1lisis%20estad%C3%ADstico%20de%20polimorfismos%20gen%C3%A9ticos%20en%20estudios%20epidemiol%C3%B3gicos&author=R%20Iniesta&author=E%20Guin%C3%B3&author=V%20Moreno&volume=19&issue=4&publication_year=2005&pages=333-341&pmid=16050971&doi=10.1157/13078029&)

39. Katzmarzyk PT, Chaput JP, Fogelholm M, Hu G, Maher C, Maia J, Olds T, Sarmiento OL, Standage M, Tremblay MS, Tudor-Locke C, 2019. International study of childhood obesity, lifestyle and the environment (ISCOLE): contributions to understanding the global obesity epidemic. Nutrients 11 (4), 848–872. 10.3390/nu11040848.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/nu11040848) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6521223/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30991687/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nutrients&title=International%20study%20of%20childhood%20obesity,%20lifestyle%20and%20the%20environment%20(ISCOLE):%20contributions%20to%20understanding%20the%20global%20obesity%20epidemic&author=PT%20Katzmarzyk&author=JP%20Chaput&author=M%20Fogelholm&author=G%20Hu&author=C%20Maher&volume=11&issue=4&publication_year=2019&pages=848-872&pmid=30991687&doi=10.3390/nu11040848&)

40. Kissling C, Retz W, Wiemann S, Coogan AN, Clement RM, Hünnerkopf R, Conner AC, Freitag CM, Rösler M, Thome J, 2008. A polymorphism at the 3′-untranslated region of the CLOCK gene is associated with adult attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Am. J. Med. Genet. B Neuropsychiatr. Genet 147 (3), 333–338.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.b.30602) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17948273/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Med.%20Genet.%20B%20Neuropsychiatr.%20Genet&title=A%20polymorphism%20at%20the%203%E2%80%B2-untranslated%20region%20of%20the%20CLOCK%20gene%20is%20associated%20with%20adult%20attention-deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder&author=C%20Kissling&author=W%20Retz&author=S%20Wiemann&author=AN%20Coogan&author=RM%20Clement&volume=147&issue=3&publication_year=2008&pages=333-338&pmid=17948273&doi=10.1002/ajmg.b.30602&)

41. Klein M, Onnink M, van Donkelaar M, Wolfers T, Harich B, Shi Y, Dammers J, Arias-Vásquez A, Hoogman M, Franke B, 2017. Brain imaging genetics in ADHD and beyond - mapping pathways from gene to disorder at different levels of complexity. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev 80, 115–155.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.01.013) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6947924/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28159610/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neurosci.%20Biobehav.%20Rev&title=Brain%20imaging%20genetics%20in%20ADHD%20and%20beyond%20-%20mapping%20pathways%20from%20gene%20to%20disorder%20at%20different%20levels%20of%20complexity&author=M%20Klein&author=M%20Onnink&author=M%20van%20Donkelaar&author=T%20Wolfers&author=B%20Harich&volume=80&publication_year=2017&pages=115-155&pmid=28159610&doi=10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.01.013&)

42. Kohse K, 2015. National and international initiatives and approaches for the establishment of reference intervals in pediatric laboratory medicine. Lab. Med 39 (4), 197–212. 10.1515/labmed-2015-0055.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1515/labmed-2015-0055) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Lab.%20Med&title=National%20and%20international%20initiatives%20and%20approaches%20for%20the%20establishment%20of%20reference%20intervals%20in%20pediatric%20laboratory%20medicine&author=K%20Kohse&volume=39&issue=4&publication_year=2015&pages=197-212&doi=10.1515/labmed-2015-0055&)

43. Krishnan M, Shelling AN, Wall CR, Mitchell EA, Murphy R, McCowan LME, Thompson JMD, 2017. Gene-by-environment interactions of the CLOCK, PEMT, and GHRELIN loci with average sleep duration in relation to obesity traits using a cohort of 643 New Zealand European children. Sleep Med. 37, 19–26.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sleep.2017.05.017) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28899534/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sleep%20Med&title=Gene-by-environment%20interactions%20of%20the%20CLOCK,%20PEMT,%20and%20GHRELIN%20loci%20with%20average%20sleep%20duration%20in%20relation%20to%20obesity%20traits%20using%20a%20cohort%20of%20643%20New%20Zealand%20European%20children&author=M%20Krishnan&author=AN%20Shelling&author=CR%20Wall&author=EA%20Mitchell&author=R%20Murphy&volume=37&publication_year=2017&pages=19-26&pmid=28899534&doi=10.1016/j.sleep.2017.05.017&)

44. Kuczmarski RJ, Ogden CL, Guo SS, Grummer-Strawn LM, Flegal KM, Mei Z, Wei R, Curtin LR, Roche AF, Johnson CL, 2002. 2000 CDC growth charts for the United States: methods and development. Vital Health Stat. 11 (246), 1–190.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12043359/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Vital%20Health%20Stat&title=2000%20CDC%20growth%20charts%20for%20the%20United%20States:%20methods%20and%20development&author=RJ%20Kuczmarski&author=CL%20Ogden&author=SS%20Guo&author=LM%20Grummer-Strawn&author=KM%20Flegal&volume=11&issue=246&publication_year=2002&pages=1-190&pmid=12043359&)

45. Lachar D, Randle SL, Harper RA, Scott-Gurnell KC, Lewis KR, Santos CW, Saunders AE, Pearson DA, Loveland KA, Morgan ST, 2001. The brief psychiatric rating scale for children (BPRS-C): validity and reliability of an anchored version. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 40 (3), 333–340.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/00004583-200103000-00013) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11288775/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Am.%20Acad.%20Child%20Adolesc.%20Psychiatry&title=The%20brief%20psychiatric%20rating%20scale%20for%20children%20(BPRS-C):%20validity%20and%20reliability%20of%20an%20anchored%20version&author=D%20Lachar&author=SL%20Randle&author=RA%20Harper&author=KC%20Scott-Gurnell&author=KR%20Lewis&volume=40&issue=3&publication_year=2001&pages=333-340&pmid=11288775&doi=10.1097/00004583-200103000-00013&)

46. Langrock C, Hebebrand J, Radowksi K, Hamelmann E, Lücke T, Holtmann M, Legenbauer T, Schmidt B, Frank M, Jöckel KH, Reinehr T, 2018. Thyroid hormone status in overweight children with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Horm. Res. Paediatr 89 (3), 150–156.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1159/000485620) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29320782/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Horm.%20Res.%20Paediatr&title=Thyroid%20hormone%20status%20in%20overweight%20children%20with%20attention%20deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder&author=C%20Langrock&author=J%20Hebebrand&author=K%20Radowksi&author=E%20Hamelmann&author=T%20L%C3%BCcke&volume=89&issue=3&publication_year=2018&pages=150-156&pmid=29320782&doi=10.1159/000485620&)

47. Lee KY, Song JY, Kim SH, Kim SC, Joo EJ, Ahn YM, Kim YS, 2010. Association between CLOCK 3111T/C and preferred circadian phase in Korean patients with bipolar disorder. Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 34 (7), 1196–1201.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2010.06.010) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20600471/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Prog.%20Neuropsychopharmacol.%20Biol.%20Psychiatry&title=Association%20between%20CLOCK%203111T/C%20and%20preferred%20circadian%20phase%20in%20Korean%20patients%20with%20bipolar%20disorder&author=KY%20Lee&author=JY%20Song&author=SH%20Kim&author=SC%20Kim&author=EJ%20Joo&volume=34&issue=7&publication_year=2010&pages=1196-1201&pmid=20600471&doi=10.1016/j.pnpbp.2010.06.010&)

48. Martinez-Cayuelas E, Moreno-Vinues B, Pozo RL, Rodrigo-Moreno M, Soto-Insuga V, Pérez-Villena A, 2022. Sleep, chronotype, and behavior in adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Arch. Pediatr 29 (4), 277–280.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcped.2022.02.005) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35387750/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Arch.%20Pediatr&title=Sleep,%20chronotype,%20and%20behavior%20in%20adolescents%20with%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder&author=E%20Martinez-Cayuelas&author=B%20Moreno-Vinues&author=RL%20Pozo&author=M%20Rodrigo-Moreno&author=V%20Soto-Insuga&volume=29&issue=4&publication_year=2022&pages=277-280&pmid=35387750&doi=10.1016/j.arcped.2022.02.005&)

49. Medina-Mora ME, Borges G, Benjet C, Lara C, Berglund P, 2007. Psychiatric disorders in Mexico: lifetime prevalence in a nationally representative sample. Br. J. Psychiatry 190, 521–528.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.106.025841) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17541113/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Br.%20J.%20Psychiatry&title=Psychiatric%20disorders%20in%20Mexico:%20lifetime%20prevalence%20in%20a%20nationally%20representative%20sample&author=ME%20Medina-Mora&author=G%20Borges&author=C%20Benjet&author=C%20Lara&author=P%20Berglund&volume=190&publication_year=2007&pages=521-528&pmid=17541113&doi=10.1192/bjp.bp.106.025841&)

50. Meng Y, Lohse B, Cunningham-Sabo L, 2020. Sex modifies the association between the CLOCK variant rs1801260 and BMI in school-age children. PLoS One 15 (8), e0236991.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0236991) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7423126/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32785234/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20One&title=Sex%20modifies%20the%20association%20between%20the%20CLOCK%20variant%20rs1801260%20and%20BMI%20in%20school-age%20children&author=Y%20Meng&author=B%20Lohse&author=L%20Cunningham-Sabo&volume=15&issue=8&publication_year=2020&pages=e0236991&pmid=32785234&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0236991&)

51. Nazem MR, Bastanhagh E, Emami A, Hedayati M, Samimi S, Karami M, 2021. The relationship between thyroid function tests and sleep quality: cross-sectional study. Sleep Sci. 14 (3), 196–200.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.5935/1984-0063.20200050) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8848531/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35186196/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sleep%20Sci&title=The%20relationship%20between%20thyroid%20function%20tests%20and%20sleep%20quality:%20cross-sectional%20study&author=MR%20Nazem&author=E%20Bastanhagh&author=A%20Emami&author=M%20Hedayati&author=S%20Samimi&volume=14&issue=3&publication_year=2021&pages=196-200&pmid=35186196&doi=10.5935/1984-0063.20200050&)

52. Nigg JT, Johnstone JM, Musser ED, Long HG, Willoughby MT, Shannon J, 2016. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and being overweight/obesity: new data and meta-analysis. Clin. Psychol. Rev 43, 67–79.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2015.11.005) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4800333/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26780581/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin.%20Psychol.%20Rev&title=Attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder%20(ADHD)%20and%20being%20overweight/obesity:%20new%20data%20and%20meta-analysis&author=JT%20Nigg&author=JM%20Johnstone&author=ED%20Musser&author=HG%20Long&author=MT%20Willoughby&volume=43&publication_year=2016&pages=67-79&pmid=26780581&doi=10.1016/j.cpr.2015.11.005&)

53. Paine SJ, Gander PH, Travier N, 2006. The epidemiology of morningness/eveningness: influence of age, gender, ethnicity, and socioeconomic factors in adults (30–49 years). J. Biol. Rhythms 21 (1), 68–76.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1177/0748730405283154) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16461986/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biol.%20Rhythms&title=The%20epidemiology%20of%20morningness/eveningness:%20influence%20of%20age,%20gender,%20ethnicity,%20and%20socioeconomic%20factors%20in%20adults%20(30%E2%80%9349%20years)&author=SJ%20Paine&author=PH%20Gander&author=N%20Travier&volume=21&issue=1&publication_year=2006&pages=68-76&pmid=16461986&doi=10.1177/0748730405283154&)

54. Polanczyk GV, Salum GA, Sugaya LS, Caye A, Rohde LA, 2015. Annual research review: a meta-analysis of the worldwide prevalence of mental disorders in children and adolescents. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 56 (3), 345–365.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.12381) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25649325/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Child%20Psychol.%20Psychiatry&title=Annual%20research%20review:%20a%20meta-analysis%20of%20the%20worldwide%20prevalence%20of%20mental%20disorders%20in%20children%20and%20adolescents&author=GV%20Polanczyk&author=GA%20Salum&author=LS%20Sugaya&author=A%20Caye&author=LA%20Rohde&volume=56&issue=3&publication_year=2015&pages=345-365&pmid=25649325&doi=10.1111/jcpp.12381&)

55. Roman S, Ojeda-Granados C, Panduro A, 2013. Genética y evolución de la alimentación de la población de México. Revista de Endocrinología y Nutrición 21 (1), 42–51.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Revista%20de%20Endocrinolog%C3%ADa%20y%20Nutrici%C3%B3n&title=Gen%C3%A9tica%20y%20evoluci%C3%B3n%20de%20la%20alimentaci%C3%B3n%20de%20la%20poblaci%C3%B3n%20de%20M%C3%A9xico&author=S%20Roman&author=C%20Ojeda-Granados&author=A%20Panduro&volume=21&issue=1&publication_year=2013&pages=42-51&)

56. Salas A, Carracedo A, 2007. Studies of association in complex diseases: statistical problems related to the analysis of genetic polymorphisms. Rev. Clin. Esp 207 (11), 563–565.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1157/13111575) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18021645/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Rev.%20Clin.%20Esp&title=Studies%20of%20association%20in%20complex%20diseases:%20statistical%20problems%20related%20to%20the%20analysis%20of%20genetic%20polymorphisms&author=A%20Salas&author=A%20Carracedo&volume=207&issue=11&publication_year=2007&pages=563-565&pmid=18021645&doi=10.1157/13111575&)

57. Salcido A, Robles EH, Chaudhary K, Alvarado L, Iñiguez SD, Vargas-Medrano J, Diaz-Pacheco V, Villanos MT, Gadad BS, Martin SL, 2021. Association of ADHD and obesity in hispanic children on the US-Mexico border: a retrospective analysis. Front. Integr. Neurosci 15, 749907.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnint.2021.749907) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8766828/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35069136/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front.%20Integr.%20Neurosci&title=Association%20of%20ADHD%20and%20obesity%20in%20hispanic%20children%20on%20the%20US-Mexico%20border:%20a%20retrospective%20analysis&author=A%20Salcido&author=EH%20Robles&author=K%20Chaudhary&author=L%20Alvarado&author=SD%20I%C3%B1iguez&volume=15&publication_year=2021&pages=749907&pmid=35069136&doi=10.3389/fnint.2021.749907&)

58. Schuch JB, Genro JP, Bastos CR, Ghisleni G, Tovo-Rodrigues L, 2018. The role of CLOCK gene in psychiatric disorders: evidence from human and animal research. Am. J. Med. Genet. B Neuropsychiatr. Genet 177 (2), 181–198.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.b.32599) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28902457/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Med.%20Genet.%20B%20Neuropsychiatr.%20Genet&title=The%20role%20of%20CLOCK%20gene%20in%20psychiatric%20disorders:%20evidence%20from%20human%20and%20animal%20research&author=JB%20Schuch&author=JP%20Genro&author=CR%20Bastos&author=G%20Ghisleni&author=L%20Tovo-Rodrigues&volume=177&issue=2&publication_year=2018&pages=181-198&pmid=28902457&doi=10.1002/ajmg.b.32599&)

59. Septier M, Stordeur C, Zhang J, Delorme R, Cortese S, 2019. Association between suicidal spectrum behaviors and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev 103, 109–118.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.05.022) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31129238/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neurosci.%20Biobehav.%20Rev&title=Association%20between%20suicidal%20spectrum%20behaviors%20and%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder:%20a%20systematic%20review%20and%20meta-analysis&author=M%20Septier&author=C%20Stordeur&author=J%20Zhang&author=R%20Delorme&author=S%20Cortese&volume=103&publication_year=2019&pages=109-118&pmid=31129238&doi=10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.05.022&)

60. Serretti A, Benedetti F, Mandelli L, Lorenzi C, Pirovano A, Colombo C, Smeraldi E, 2003. Genetic dissection of psychopathological symptoms: insomnia in mood disorders and CLOCK gene polymorphism. Am. J. Med. Genet. B Neuropsychiatr. Genet 121b (1), 35–38.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.b.20053) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12898572/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Med.%20Genet.%20B%20Neuropsychiatr.%20Genet&title=Genetic%20dissection%20of%20psychopathological%20symptoms:%20insomnia%20in%20mood%20disorders%20and%20CLOCK%20gene%20polymorphism&author=A%20Serretti&author=F%20Benedetti&author=L%20Mandelli&author=C%20Lorenzi&author=A%20Pirovano&volume=121b&issue=1&publication_year=2003&pages=35-38&pmid=12898572&doi=10.1002/ajmg.b.20053&)

61. Skoglund C, Kopp Kallner H, Skalkidou A, Wikström AK, Lundin C, Hesselman S, Wikman A, Sundström Poromaa I, 2019. Association of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder with teenage birth among women and girls in Sweden. JAMA Netw. Open 2 (10), e1912463.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.12463) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6777395/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31577361/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=JAMA%20Netw.%20Open&title=Association%20of%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder%20with%20teenage%20birth%20among%20women%20and%20girls%20in%20Sweden&author=C%20Skoglund&author=H%20Kopp%20Kallner&author=A%20Skalkidou&author=AK%20Wikstr%C3%B6m&author=C%20Lundin&volume=2&issue=10&publication_year=2019&pages=e1912463&pmid=31577361&doi=10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.12463&)

62. Škrlec I, Talapko J, Džijan S, Cesar V, Lazić N, Lepeduš H, 2021. The association between circadian clock gene polymorphisms and metabolic syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Biology 11 (1), 1–14. 10.3390/biology11010020 (Basel).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/biology11010020) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8773381/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35053018/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biology&title=The%20association%20between%20circadian%20clock%20gene%20polymorphisms%20and%20metabolic%20syndrome:%20a%20systematic%20review%20and%20meta-analysis&author=I%20%C5%A0krlec&author=J%20Talapko&author=S%20D%C5%BEijan&author=V%20Cesar&author=N%20Lazi%C4%87&volume=11&issue=1&publication_year=2021&pages=1-14&pmid=35053018&doi=10.3390/biology11010020&)

63. Ulloa E, Cruz L, de la Peña F, 2011. Diagnosis and treatment of psychiatric disorders in children and adolescents. Salud Ment. 34, 399–401.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Salud%20Ment&title=Diagnosis%20and%20treatment%20of%20psychiatric%20disorders%20in%20children%20and%20adolescents&author=E%20Ulloa&author=L%20Cruz&author=F%20de%20la%20Pe%C3%B1a&volume=34&publication_year=2011&pages=399-401&)

64. Wang Y, Peng S, Liu T, Zhang Y, Li H, Li X, Tao W, Shi Y, 2020. The potential role of clock genes in children attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Sleep Med. 71, 18–27.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sleep.2020.02.021) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32460137/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sleep%20Med&title=The%20potential%20role%20of%20clock%20genes%20in%20children%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder&author=Y%20Wang&author=S%20Peng&author=T%20Liu&author=Y%20Zhang&author=H%20Li&volume=71&publication_year=2020&pages=18-27&pmid=32460137&doi=10.1016/j.sleep.2020.02.021&)

65. Weiss MD, Salpekar J, 2010. Sleep problems in the child with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: defining aetiology and appropriate treatments. CNS Drugs 24 (10), 811–828.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2165/11538990-000000000-00000) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20839894/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=CNS%20Drugs&title=Sleep%20problems%20in%20the%20child%20with%20attention-deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder:%20defining%20aetiology%20and%20appropriate%20treatments&author=MD%20Weiss&author=J%20Salpekar&volume=24&issue=10&publication_year=2010&pages=811-828&pmid=20839894&doi=10.2165/11538990-000000000-00000&)

66. Weiss RE, Stein MA, Trommer B, Refetoff S, 1993. Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and thyroid function. J. Pediatr 123 (4), 539–545.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-3476(05)80947-3) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8410504/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Pediatr&title=Attention-deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder%20and%20thyroid%20function&author=RE%20Weiss&author=MA%20Stein&author=B%20Trommer&author=S%20Refetoff&volume=123&issue=4&publication_year=1993&pages=539-545&pmid=8410504&doi=10.1016/s0022-3476(05)80947-3&)

67. Xu X, Breen G, Chen CK, Huang YS, Wu YY, Asherson P, 2010. Association study between a polymorphism at the 3′-untranslated region of CLOCK gene and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Behav. Brain Funct 6, 48.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1744-9081-6-48) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2925327/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20704703/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Behav.%20Brain%20Funct&title=Association%20study%20between%20a%20polymorphism%20at%20the%203%E2%80%B2-untranslated%20region%20of%20CLOCK%20gene%20and%20attention%20deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder&author=X%20Xu&author=G%20Breen&author=CK%20Chen&author=YS%20Huang&author=YY%20Wu&volume=6&publication_year=2010&pages=48&pmid=20704703&doi=10.1186/1744-9081-6-48&)

68. Yadav SK, Bhat AA, Hashem S, Nisar S, Kamal M, Syed N, Temanni MR, Gupta RK, Kamran S, Azeem MW, Srivastava AK, Bagga P, Chawla S, Reddy R, Frenneaux MP, Fakhro K, Haris M, 2021. Genetic variations influence brain changes in patients with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Transl. Psychiatry 11 (1), 349.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-021-01473-w) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8179928/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34091591/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Transl.%20Psychiatry&title=Genetic%20variations%20influence%20brain%20changes%20in%20patients%20with%20attention-deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder&author=SK%20Yadav&author=AA%20Bhat&author=S%20Hashem&author=S%20Nisar&author=M%20Kamal&volume=11&issue=1&publication_year=2021&pages=349&pmid=34091591&doi=10.1038/s41398-021-01473-w&)

69. Young S, Asherson P, Lloyd T, Absoud M, Arif M, Colley WA, Cortese S, Cubbin S, Doyle N, Morua SD, Ferreira-Lay P, Gudjonsson G, Ivens V, Jarvis C, Lewis A, Mason P, Newlove-Delgado T, Pitts M, Read H, van Rensburg K, Zoritch B, Skirrow C, 2021. Failure of healthcare provision for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in the United Kingdom: a consensus statement. Front. Psychiatry 12, 649399.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2021.649399) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8017218/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33815178/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front.%20Psychiatry&title=Failure%20of%20healthcare%20provision%20for%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder%20in%20the%20United%20Kingdom:%20a%20consensus%20statement&author=S%20Young&author=P%20Asherson&author=T%20Lloyd&author=M%20Absoud&author=M%20Arif&volume=12&publication_year=2021&pages=649399&pmid=33815178&doi=10.3389/fpsyt.2021.649399&)

70. Zhang J, Liao G, Liu C, Sun L, Liu Y, Wang Y, Jiang Z, Wang Z, 2011. The association of CLOCK gene T3111C polymorphism and hPER3 gene 54-nucleotide repeat polymorphism with Chinese Han people schizophrenics. Mol. Biol. Rep 38 (1), 349–354.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11033-010-0114-2) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20364331/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Biol.%20Rep&title=The%20association%20of%20CLOCK%20gene%20T3111C%20polymorphism%20and%20hPER3%20gene%2054-nucleotide%20repeat%20polymorphism%20with%20Chinese%20Han%20people%20schizophrenics&author=J%20Zhang&author=G%20Liao&author=C%20Liu&author=L%20Sun&author=Y%20Liu&volume=38&issue=1&publication_year=2011&pages=349-354&pmid=20364331&doi=10.1007/s11033-010-0114-2&)
