# Racial or ethnic differences in allele frequencies of single‐nucleotide polymorphisms in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene and their influence on response to methotrexate in rheumatoid arthritis

## Metadata
**Authors:** L B Hughes, T M Beasley, H Patel, H K Tiwari, S L Morgan, J E Baggott, K G Saag, J McNicholl, L W Moreland, G S Alarcón, S L Bridges, Jr
**Journal:** Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases
**Date:** 2006 Jan 26
**DOI:** [10.1136/ard.2005.046797](https://doi.org/10.1136/ard.2005.046797)
**PMID:** 16439441
**PMCID:** PMC1798268
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1798268/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1798268/pdf/1213.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1798268/pdf/1213.pdf)

## Abstract

**Background:** 
The anti‐folate drug methotrexate (MTX) is commonly used to treat rheumatoid arthritis.

**Objective:** 
To determine the allele frequencies of five common coding single‐nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene in African‐Americans and Caucasians with rheumatoid arthritis and controls to assess whether there are differences in allele frequencies among these ethnic or racial groups and whether these SNPs differentially affect the efficacy or toxicity of MTX.

**Methods:** 
Allele frequencies in the 677, 1298 and 3 additional SNPs in the MTHFR coding region in 223 (193 Caucasians and 30 African‐Americans) patients with rheumatoid arthritis who previously participated in one of two prospective clinical trials were characterised, and genotypes were correlated with the efficacy and toxicity of MTX. Another 308 subjects with rheumatoid arthritis who participated in observational studies, one group predominantly Caucasian and the other African‐American, as well as 103 normal controls (53 African‐Americans and 50 Caucasians) were used to characterise allele frequencies of these SNPs and their associated haplotypes.

**Results:** 
Significantly different allele frequencies were seen in three of the five SNPs and haplotype frequencies between Caucasians and African‐Americans. Allele frequencies were similar between patients with rheumatoid arthritis and controls of the same racial or ethnic group. Frequencies of the rs4846051C, 677T and 1298C alleles were 0.33, 0.11 and 0.13, respectively, among African‐Americans with rheumatoid arthritis. Among Caucasians with rheumatoid arthritis, these allele frequencies were 0.08 (p<0.001 compared with African‐Americans with rheumatoid arthritis), 0.30 (p = 0.002) and 0.34 (p<0.001), respectively. There was no association between SNP alleles or haplotypes and response to MTX as measured by the mean change in the 28‐joint Disease Activity Score from baseline values. In Caucasians, the 1298 A (major) allele was associated with a significant increase in MTX‐related adverse events characteristic of a recessive genetic effect (odds ratio 15.86, 95% confidence interval 1.51 to 167.01; p = 0.021), confirming previous reports. There was an association between scores of MTX toxicity and the rs4846051 C allele, and haplotypes containing this allele, in African‐Americans, but not in Caucasians.

**Conclusions:** 
: These results, although preliminary, highlight racial or ethnic differences in frequencies of common MTHFR SNPs. The MTHFR 1298 A and the rs4846051 C alleles were associated with MTX‐related adverse events in Caucasians and African‐Americans, respectively, but these findings should be replicated in larger studies. The rs4846051 SNP, which is far more common in African‐Americans than in Caucasians, can also be proved to be a useful ancestry informative marker in future studies on genetic admixture.

### Background

The anti‐folate drug methotrexate (MTX) is commonly used to treat rheumatoid arthritis.

### Objective

To determine the allele frequencies of five common coding single‐nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (*MTHFR*) gene in African‐Americans and Caucasians with rheumatoid arthritis and controls to assess whether there are differences in allele frequencies among these ethnic or racial groups and whether these SNPs differentially affect the efficacy or toxicity of MTX.

### Methods

Allele frequencies in the 677, 1298 and 3 additional SNPs in the *MTHFR* coding region in 223 (193 Caucasians and 30 African‐Americans) patients with rheumatoid arthritis who previously participated in one of two prospective clinical trials were characterised, and genotypes were correlated with the efficacy and toxicity of MTX. Another 308 subjects with rheumatoid arthritis who participated in observational studies, one group predominantly Caucasian and the other African‐American, as well as 103 normal controls (53 African‐Americans and 50 Caucasians) were used to characterise allele frequencies of these SNPs and their associated haplotypes.

### Results

Significantly different allele frequencies were seen in three of the five SNPs and haplotype frequencies between Caucasians and African‐Americans. Allele frequencies were similar between patients with rheumatoid arthritis and controls of the same racial or ethnic group. Frequencies of the rs4846051C, 677T and 1298C alleles were 0.33, 0.11 and 0.13, respectively, among African‐Americans with rheumatoid arthritis. Among Caucasians with rheumatoid arthritis, these allele frequencies were 0.08 (p<0.001 compared with African‐Americans with rheumatoid arthritis), 0.30 (p = 0.002) and 0.34 (p<0.001), respectively. There was no association between SNP alleles or haplotypes and response to MTX as measured by the mean change in the 28‐joint Disease Activity Score from baseline values. In Caucasians, the 1298 A (major) allele was associated with a significant increase in MTX‐related adverse events characteristic of a recessive genetic effect (odds ratio 15.86, 95% confidence interval 1.51 to 167.01; p = 0.021), confirming previous reports. There was an association between scores of MTX toxicity and the rs4846051 C allele, and haplotypes containing this allele, in African‐Americans, but not in Caucasians.

### Conclusions

: These results, although preliminary, highlight racial or ethnic differences in frequencies of common *MTHFR* SNPs. The *MTHFR* 1298 A and the rs4846051 C alleles were associated with MTX‐related adverse events in Caucasians and African‐Americans, respectively, but these findings should be replicated in larger studies. The rs4846051 SNP, which is far more common in African‐Americans than in Caucasians, can also be proved to be a useful ancestry informative marker in future studies on genetic admixture.

## Patients and methods

### Subjects and controls

Our analysis included 531 well‐characterised people with rheumatoid arthritis defined by the American College of Radiology (ACR) criteria.[17](#ref17) This included 108 African‐American patients from the Grady African‐American Rheumatoid Arthritis cohort,[18](#ref18) 200 Caucasians from the Iowa rheumatoid arthritis cohort,[19](#ref19) 77 subjects with rheumatoid arthritis (59 Caucasians, 18 African‐Americans) from a prospective clinical trial of folate supplementation during MTX treatment,[20](#ref20) and 146 MTX‐treated patients (134 Caucasians, 12 African‐Americans) who participated in the Immunex early rheumatoid arthritis (ERA) trial comparing MTX with two doses of etanercept.[21](#ref21) In addition, 103 healthy controls comprising 53 African‐Americans from Birmingham, Alabama and Atlanta, Georgia, and 50 Caucasians from Birmingham, Alabama, were included.

### Data on MTX toxicity

Each of the 223 subjects (193 Caucasians and 30 African‐Americans) with rheumatoid arthritis who participated in one of the two clinical trials (University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) folate trial and Immunex ERA trial) was prospectively evaluated for toxicity of MTX. In the UAB folate trial, laboratory data and detailed information regarding toxicity of MTX were evaluated at approximately 12‐week intervals for 52 weeks.[20](#ref20) Participants received a mean MTX dose of 9.1 mg a week and 5 mg a week of folic acid, 27.5 mg a week of folic acid, or placebo.[20](#ref20) In all, 68% of the participants experienced some form of toxicity of MTX, most commonly nausea with indigestion (39%), diarrhoea (14%), oral ulcers or stomatitis (11%), and rash (11%).[20](#ref20) Events were more in the placebo group than in the folic acid groups (p⩽0.001). Each of the 77 patients with rheumatoid arthritis in the UAB folate trial was assigned a cumulative MTX toxicity score determined by detailed information on the organ system, duration and intensity of side effects.[20](#ref20)

In the Immunex ERA trial, one third of the participants received MTX and placebo for etanercept. DNA and clinical data were available for 146 participants. MTX doses were escalated according to a standard protocol; the mean MTX dose was 19 mg a week. All participants received 1 mg of folic acid a day.[21](#ref21) Adverse events and laboratory data were obtained at scheduled visits occurring at intervals between 2 and 8 weeks for 52 weeks. Data on toxicity were obtained from all participants and defined categorically according to the common toxicity criteria of the National Cancer Institute.[21](#ref21) In all, 96% of the MTX‐treated participants experienced toxicity, most commonly nausea or indigestion (35.1%), skin rash or pruritis (21.2%), and fatigue or malaise or headache (19.1%). Table 1 shows the specific toxicities according to organ group.

### Table 1 Number and organ‐specific types of toxicity from 223 participants in the University of Alabama at Birmingham folate and Immunex early rheumatoid arthritis trials.

| MTX toxicity by organ system | Number of events (n = 362) | Total events (%) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| General | 69 | 19.1 |
| Gastrointestinal | 127 | 35.1 |
| Ear, nose, throat | 52 | 14.3 |
| Skin | 77 | 21.2 |
| Pulmonary | 23 | 6.4 |
| Neuropsychiatric | 2 | 0.6 |
| Blood chemistry | 8 | 2.2 |
| Haematological | 4 | 1.1 |
| No of subjects with any toxicity | 196 | 87.9 |

Table 1 Caption: MTX, methotrexate. Toxicities were categorised according to the common toxicity criteria of the National Cancer Institute. Each toxicity was counted only once for each subject. General: fatigue/malaise, fever (>37.7°C), headache, rigours or chills, sweating, weight gain and weight loss. Gastrointestinal: anorexia, diarrhoea, dyspepsia, gastrointestinal bleed, hepatitis, nausea or vomiting, pancreatitis. Ear, nose, throat: stomatitis, tinnitus, xerostomia. Skin: alopecia, bullous eruption, petechiae, pruritis, rash. Pulmonary: cough, dyspnoea, pleurisy, pneumonitis, decreased pulmonary function (<90% diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide or forced vital capacity of pretreatment value). Neuropsychiatric: anxiety or depression, somnolence, inability to concentrate, insomnia, decreased libido, peripheral neuropathy, vertigo. Blood chemistry: serum creatinine>1.3×upper limit of normal (ULN); serum aspartate transaminase>1.5×ULN; serum alanine transaminase>1.5×ULN; serum alkaline phosphatase>2.0×ULN. Haematological: anaemia (haemoglobin decrease>1.4 g/dl from baseline); leucopenia (total white cell count<3900/mm3); thrombocytopenia (platelet count<75 000/mm3).

### Data on MTX efficacy

Therapeutic response was evaluated in the 146 participants in the ERA trial through analysis of the ACR 20% (ACR20), 50% (ACR50) or 70% (ACR70) response criteria, and the serial 28‐joint Disease Activity Score (DAS28) values.[22](#ref22),[23](#ref23) The ACR response and DAS28 scores were calculated at the initiation of MTX treatment, 2 and 4 weeks after treatment was started, and 6, 8, 10 and 12 months after treatment was started. A mean change in DAS28 score was determined by subtracting the baseline DAS28 from the mean DAS28 during weeks 16–52 of the trial. The mean (standard deviation (SD)) baseline DAS28 for the participants treated with MTX was 5.52 (1.01), with 73% categorised as having high disease activity (DAS28 >5.1), 25% as having moderate disease activity (DAS28 >3.2 but ⩽5.1) and 2% as having low disease activity (DAS28⩽3.2). The mean (SD) DAS28 during weeks 16–52 was 3.73 (0.82), representing a mean (SD) change in DAS28 score of −1.80 (1.24). In contrast, by the end of the study, 30% of the participants had a good DAS28 response (change in DAS28 of >1.2, with a mean DAS28 of ⩽3.2), 52% had a moderate response (change in DAS of >1.2, with a mean DAS28 of ⩾3.2, or change in DAS28 of ⩽1.2, with a mean DAS28 of 0.6) and 18% had no response. At the end of the study, approximately 65% of subjects achieved an ACR20, 40% an ACR50 and 20% an ACR70 response.[21](#ref21)

### SNP identification

By using public domain and Celera SNP databases, we identified 27 coding SNPs in *MTHFR*. To have a crude estimate of the frequency of these alleles and to identify novel SNPs, we performed sequence analysis using methods optimised for heterozygote detection on 10 normal Caucasians and 10 normal African‐Americans. For complementary DNA (cDNA) sequencing, we used the primers 5′‐GGA ACC CAG CCA TGG TGA ACG‐3′ (sense) and 5′‐ACT CTC CTT CGT GTC TCT CCC ACC‐3′ (antisense) to amplify the 2085‐base‐pair (bp) *MTHFR* cDNA. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was carried out in a total volume of 50 μl, with 5 U expanded long‐template PCR polymerase mix (Roche, Nutley, New Jersey, USA) in buffer 3 provided by the manufacturer, 2.75 mM magnesium chloride (MgCl_2_), 0.2 mM deoxynucleoside triphosphate, primers at a final concentration of 0.4 μmol/l and 1 μl cDNA product from a total volume of 20 μl. This PCR product was used as a template for two subsequent nested PCR amplifications to generate two amplicons for sequencing. Sequencing was performed using the BigDye™ Terminator Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction kit (PE Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California, USA) on an ABI 377 automated sequencer.

Only 4 of the 27 SNPs had a minor allele frequency of ⩾0.05 (at least one minor allele in the 20 participants). Haplotypes were defined by the following four SNPs: 677 C/T (rs1801133) (exon 4); rs2066462 C/T (exon 6); 1298 A/C (rs1801131) (exon 7); and rs2274976 A/G (exon 11). In addition, we identified a T/C SNP 18 bp upstream of the 1298 A/C SNP in exon 7, with a minor allele frequency of 0 in Caucasians (0/20 alleles) and 0.55 in African‐Americans (11/20 alleles). Although this SNP was not listed in public databases or the Celera databases during our initial experiments, it was subsequently identified in these databases (rs4846051). We genotyped all subjects from the Grady African‐American Rheumatoid Arthritis and Iowa rheumatoid arthritis cohorts, the UAB folate and Immunex ERA trials, and normal controls.

### SNP genotyping

The 677 C/T SNP was analysed by *Hin*fI restriction fragment length polymorphism as reported previously.[24](#ref24) Sense and antisense PCR primers were 5′‐TGA AGG AGA AGG TGT CTG CGG GA‐3′ and 5′‐AGG ACG GTG CGG TGA GAG TG‐3′, respectively. PCR conditions were 95°C for 2 min, followed by 35 cycles of 95°C for 30 s, 55°C for 30 s and 72°C for 30 s, followed by a final extension of 7 min at 72°C. To analyse the rs2066462 C/T and rs2274976 G/A SNPs, we used a pyrosequencing approach (PSQ 96 instrument, Pyrosequencing AB, Uppsala, Sweden). To allow simultaneous determination of genotypes at the rs1801131 A/C (1298) and rs2274976 T/C SNPs, we amplified by PCR a 152‐bp fragment from exon 7 of *MTHFR*. In all, 20 ng of genomic DNA was used in each PCR, which included 200 μM deoxynucleoside triphosphate, 1.5 mM MgCl_2_, 0.4 μM of each primer and 5 U of Taq polymerase in standard PCR buffer. The PCR primers used were 5′‐CTT TGG GGA GCT GAA GGA CTA CTA C‐3′ (sense) and 5′‐CAC TTT GTG ACC ATT CCG GTT TG‐3′ (antisense). PCR conditions were 95°C for 2 min, followed by 35 cycles of 95°C for 30 s, 55°C for 30 s and 72°C for 30 s, followed by a final extension of 7 min at 72°C. PCR products were analysed by electrophoresis on 2% agarose gel, followed by excision of bands from the gel and purification using the Qiaquick gel extraction kit (Qiagen, Valencia, California, USA). Direct cycle sequencing of the amplified product was performed on an ABI 377 automated sequencer, using the Applied Biosystem BigDye™ Terminator Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction kit (PE Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California, USA).

### Construction of haplotypes

Haplotypes defined by the five *MTHFR* SNPs were constructed using the PHASE V.2.0 program ([http://www.stat.washington.edu/stephens/software.html](http://www.stat.washington.edu/stephens/software.html)).[25](#ref25) This program is based on the expectation–maximisation algorithm, which allows maximum‐likelihood estimates of molecular haplotype frequencies under the assumption of Hardy–Weinberg proportions, as described by Excoffier and Slatkin.[26](#ref26) PHASE V.2.0 incorporates SNP position while deducing haplotypes to account for linkage disequilibrium and is capable of making accurate haplotype calls with up to 5% missing data (alleles). In our analysis, <1% of alleles were missing. The degree of linkage disequilibrium between these 677 and 1298 SNPs was determined using Ldmax using the Graduates of the Last Decade program, which uses the expectation–maximisation algorithm[27](#ref27) to estimate the maximum likelihood of pairwise disequilibrium ([http://www.sph.umich.edu/csg/abecasis/GOLD/docs/stats.html](http://www.sph.umich.edu/csg/abecasis/GOLD/docs/stats.html)). The distribution of linkage disequilibrium is estimated by the D′ values, where D′ ranges from 0 to 1 (greater values indicate stronger linkage disequilibrium).

### Statistical analyses

Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium was assessed using χ^2^ analysis. Differences in allele and haplotype frequencies between sample populations were evaluated using the χ^2^ test. For the subset of 223 participants from the folate and Immunex ERA trials, we performed a multivariable logistic regression analysis based on the presence or absence of the minor allele for each SNP and MTX toxicity events. MTX dose and folic‐acid dose were adjusted for in the analyses. Because there were significant differences in SNP allele and haplotype frequencies between Caucasian and African‐American patients, separate analyses were carried out according to ethnic group. A similar analysis was carried out on the basis of the presence or absence of the six most common haplotypes (which defined 97.3% of African‐American and 94.7% of Caucasian haplotypes) and MTX toxicity, also adjusting for MTX and folic acid dose in the analyses. For the 146 patients in the ERA trial for whom we had ACR20, ACR50, ACR70 and DAS28 response data, logistic and linear regressions were used to assess clinical response, respectively. As this study was exploratory in nature and not all comparisons were independent (haplotypes are defined by individual SNP alleles), we did not perform explicit correction for multiple testing.

## Results

### SNP allele or haplotype frequencies in Caucasians and African‐Americans

Table 2 shows the genotype frequencies; all SNPs were in Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium. There were no significant differences in genotype frequencies of individual *MTHFR* SNPs between patients and controls, regardless of race or ethnicity. Striking differences were, however, seen in allele frequencies between African‐Americans and Caucasians (independent of disease status) in three of the five SNPs. The rs1801133 (677) T allele frequencies were 0.30 among Caucasians with rheumatoid arthritis and 0.11 among African‐Americans with rheumatoid arthritis (p = 0.002). The 1298 C allele frequency was 0.34 among Caucasians with rheumatoid arthritis and 0.13 among African‐Americans with rheumatoid arthritis (p<0.001). The most striking difference in rheumatoid arthritis between Caucasians and African‐Americans was in the frequency of the rs4846051 C allele (0.33 among African‐Americans with rheumatoid arthritis *v* 0.08 among Caucasians with rheumatoid arthritis, p<0.001).

### Table 2 Number and frequency of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene single‐nucleotide polymorphism genotypes in Causasians and African‐Americans with rheumatoid arthritis and controls.

| SNP genotype | African‐Americans with RA (n = 138) | Caucasians with RA (n = 393) | African‐American controls (n = 53) | Caucasian controls (n = 50) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 677 CC | 109 (0.79) | 196 (0.50) | 39 (0.75)* | 25 (0.50) |
| CT | 27 (0.20) | 157 (0.40) | 12 (0.23) | 22 (0.44) |
| TT | 2 (0.01) | 40 (0.10) | 1 (0.02) | 3 (0.06) |
| rs2066462 CC | 117 (0.85) | 320 (0.81) | 42 (0.79) | 37 (0.74) |
| CT | 21 (0.15) | 68 (0.18) | 10 (0.19) | 13 (0.26) |
| TT | 0 | 5 (0.01) | 1 (0.02) | 0 |
| 1298 AA | 102 (0.74) | 178 (0.45) | 36 (0.68) | 25 (0.50) |
| AC | 35 (0.25) | 165 (0.42) | 16 (0.30) | 19 (0.38) |
| CC | 1 (0.01) | 50 (0.13) | 1 (0.02) | 6 (0.12) |
| rs4846051 TT | 63 (0.46) | 387 (0.98) | 25 (0.47) | 49 (0.98) |
| TC | 60 (0.43) | 6 (0.02) | 23 (0.43) | 1 (0.02) |
| CC | 15 (0.11) | 0 | 5 (0.09) | 0 |
| rs2274976 GG | 123 (0.93) * | 355 (0.90) | 43 (0.84) * | 46 (0.92) |
| GA | 9 (0.07) | 37 (0.09) | 8 (0.16) | 4 (0.08) |
| AA | 0 | 1 (0.002) | 0 | 0 |

Table 2 Caption: RA, rheumatoid arthritis; SNP, single‐nucleotide polymorphism. Caucasians with rheumatoid arthritis were from the Iowa rheumatoid arthritis cohort (n = 200),19 the University of Alabama at Birmingham folate trial in rheumatoid arthritis (n = 59)20 and the Immunex rheumatoid arthritis trial (n = 134).21 African‐Americans with rheumatoid arthritis were from the Grady African‐American Rheumatoid Arthritis (GAARA) cohort (n = 108),18 the aforementioned folate trial (n = 18) and Immunex trial (n = 12). *In all, 102 subjects from GAARA were genotyped at the rs2274976 GA SNP; 52 African‐American controls were genotyped at the 677 CT SNP and 51 subjects at the rs2274976 GA SNP.

As expected from the differences in allele frequencies, there were significant differences in haplotype distributions between Caucasians and African‐Americans. Table 3 gives a complete list of haplotypes. The most common haplotypes (haplotypes 1–6) accounted for ∼98% of all haplotypes. The overall haplotype distributions were significantly different between African‐Americans and Caucasians, regardless of disease status (p<0.001).

### Table 3 Number and frequency of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene single‐nucleotide polymorphism haplotypes in Causasians and African‐Americans with rheumatoid arthritis and controls.

| SNP haplotype | African‐Americans with RA (n = 138) | Caucasians with RA (n = 393) | African‐American controls (n = 53) | Caucasian controls (n = 50) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1. C/C/A/T/G | 115 (0.417) | 272 (0.346) | 39 (0.368) | 38 (0.380) |
| 2. T/C/A/T/G | 28 (0.102) | 233 (0.296) | 14 (0.132) | 28 (0.280) |
| 3. C/C/C/T/G | 20 (0.073) | 186 (0.237) | 6 (0.057) | 20 (0.200) |
| 4. C/C/A/C/G | 88 (0.321) | 5 (0.010) | 33 (0.311) | 1 (0.010) |
| 5. C/T/C/T/G | 12 (0.044) | 42 (0.053) | 6 (0.057) | 8 (0.080) |
| 6. C/T/C/T/A | 6 (0.024) | 28 (0.036) | 5 (0.047) | 3 (0.030) |
| 7. C/C/C/T/A | 0 | 6 (0.012) | 1 (0.009) | 0 |
| 8. C/T/A/T/A | 2 (0.008) | 2 (0.004) | 1 (0.009) | 1 (0.010) |
| 9. C/T/A/T/G | 2 (0.008) | 4 (0.005) | 0 | 1 (0.010) |
| 10. T/C/C/T/G | 0 | 4 (0.008) | 0 | 0 |
| 11. C/C/A/T/A | 1(0.004) | 2 (0.004) | 1 (0.009) | 0 |
| 12. C/T/A/C/G | 0 | 1 (0.002) | 0 | 0 |
| 13. T/T/A/T/G | 1 (0.004) | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| 14. T/C/A/T/A | 0 | 1 (0.002) | 0 | 0 |
| 15. T/C/A/C/G | 2 (0.007) | 0 | 0 | 0 |

Table 3 Caption: RA, rheumatoid arthritis; SNP, single‐nucleotide polymorphism. Haplotypes were defined by the five SNPs shown in table 1: 677 (rs1801133), rs2066462, 1298 (rs1801131), rs4846051 and rs2274976. The difference in haplotype distribution between Caucasians and African‐Americans with rheumatoid arthritis was significant (p = 0.001).

### SNP alleles or haplotypes and MTX efficacy and toxicity

We found no association between SNP alleles or haplotypes and efficacy as defined by the mean change in DAS28 or achievement of ACR20, ACR50 or ACR70 response among the 146 participants in the Immunex ERA trial.[21](#ref21),[22](#ref22) Our analysis of adverse events in 223 participants in the UAB folate and Immunex ERA trials, however, showed several important findings. Among Caucasians (n = 193), there was a significant association between the presence of the 1298 A allele and the presence of at least one MTX‐related adverse event (odds ratio 15.9, 95% confidence interval 1.5 to 167.0; p = 0.021). We found no other significant associations between SNP alleles or haplotypes and the presence of overall MTX toxicity, and no SNP or haplotype associations with specific types of MTX toxicity as defined by organ systems. No correlations were found between SNP alleles or haplotypes and the presence or absence of MTX toxicity or specific types of MTX toxicity in 30 African‐Americans from these two trials. We, however, found an association with the quantitative MTX toxicity score (see below).

In addition to the approach described above, we analysed *MTHFR* genotypes and cumulative toxicity scores in the UAB folate trial.[20](#ref20) The toxicity scores of all subjects in the three groups combined (27.5 mg folate, 5 mg folate and 0 mg placebo) ranged from 0 to 9.29, with a mean score of 1.519 and a median score of 0.058. Among the African‐Americans (n = 18), the mean and median toxicity scores were 0.73 and 0.056, respectively. The mean and median scores among the Caucasians (n = 59) were 4.643 and 0.063, respectively. Linear regression was used to assess genetic effects on toxicity. Analysis of the residuals indicated a slight departure from normality. A log transformation was used and the results were extremely similar; therefore, we report the results based on the untransformed variables. The presence of the C allele at the exon 7 rs4846051 SNP was associated with a higher mean toxicity score among African‐Americans than Caucasians (0.371 *v* 0.078, p = 0.050). The presence of at least one copy of haplotype 4 (which contains the rs4846051 C allele) was also associated with a higher toxicity score among the African‐Americans (p = 0.03). No other significant associations were seen between SNP alleles or haplotypes and MTX toxicity scores in the Caucasians or African‐Americans in this trial.

## Discussion

We have defined racial or ethnic differences in frequencies of SNP alleles and novel SNP haplotypes in the coding region of *MTHFR*. Analyses of *MTHFR* SNP haplotypes by other investigators have focused on the 677 and 1298 SNPs, and more recently the rs2274976 SNP.[28](#ref28) One study of Israelis, Ghanaians and Japanese showed substantial differences in 677 T allele frequencies in Africans (0.08) compared with Caucasians (0.34) and Japanese (0.42).[12](#ref12) Similar frequencies of the 677 T allele were reported in a study evaluating 95 European and 95 African blood donors, with a 677 T allele frequency of 0.316 in Europeans compared with 0.038 in Africans.[28](#ref28) The 677 T allele frequency in our African‐American population (n = 179) was slightly higher at 0.12 than Africans, probably reflecting genetic admixture with the Caucasian population.

Our study corroborates the finding of linkage between the 677 T allele and the 1298 A allele in Caucasians.[12](#ref12) Of the 15 haplotypes shown in table 2, 5 contain the 677 T allele (haplotypes 2, 10, 13–15), which account for 311 of the 1268 haplotypes (24.5%). Of the 311 haplotypes containing the 677 T allele, 307 (98.7%); (2, 13, 14 and 15) also contained the 1298 A allele Haplotypes. In Caucasians, the D′ value for the 677 and 1298 SNPs was 0.955, indicating strong linkage disequilibrium. In African‐Americans, however, the D′ value was much lower (0.408), indicating less linkage disequilibrium between the two SNPs in this racial or ethnic group. We found no associations between SNP alleles or haplotypes and efficacy of MTX as defined by the mean change in DAS28, despite 82% of the subjects having a good to moderate response by the end of the study.

We found an association between the 1298 A allele and the presence of at least one MTX‐related toxicity event in 193 Caucasians with rheumatoid arthritis (including both the Immunex ERA trial and the UAB folate trial). We found no such association among the 18 African‐American patients who had MTX toxicity (of a total of 30 African‐Americans from the Immunex ERA and the UAB folate trials). The lack of association in African‐Americans is probably because of a lack of statistical power. We did not find an association between the 677 SNP and toxicity of MTX in either Caucasians or African‐Americans. We do not believe that this is due to a concealing effect by linkage disequilibrium, as there was no evidence of two‐way interaction found between the 677 and 1298 SNPs. The association of the 1298 A allele with MTX toxicity corroborates the findings in a Jewish population with rheumatoid arthritis[15](#ref15),[16](#ref16) and those in a Japanese population with rheumatoid arthritis. We did not find the 1298 A allele to be over‐represented in either our Caucasian or African‐American patients with rheumatoid arthritis compared with the controls, as reported by Berkun *et al*.[16](#ref16)

This characterisation of *MTHFR* SNP allele and haplotype frequencies (independent of MTX toxicity) included 138 African‐Americans and 393 Caucasians with rheumatoid arthritis. Significant differences in SNP allele frequencies in Caucasian and African‐American patients and controls were found in the 677C/T 1298A/C and rs4846051 T/C SNPs. The minor allele frequency of the rs4846051 SNP differs by ∼30% between the African‐American and Caucasian populations with rheumatoid arthritis and therefore may prove to be a useful ancestry informative marker in future analyses on admixtures.[29](#ref29)

One potential limitation of this study is that our toxicity data are derived from two clinical trials in which the mean dose of MTX and folic‐acid supplementation differed. Although we accounted for MTX and folic‐acid dose in our statistical analyses, these may have affected the data on both toxicity and efficacy, as suggested by data from Khanna *et al*.[30](#ref30) In addition, we do not have detailed information on other factors such as weight that may influence MTX pharmacokinetics. Another limitation is our lack of statistical power among African‐Americans with rheumatoid arthritis, which highlights the need for cohorts of African‐Americans with rheumatoid arthritis.[31](#ref31) Finally, there may have been some confounders of the reportedly MTX‐related adverse events—for example, fatigue and malaise may be due to rheumatoid arthritis disease activity and dyspepsia may be due to concurrent drugs such as non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory drugs. Thus, these findings should be replicated in larger studies, particularly those that include African‐Americans.

Because of the many actions of MTX, multiple genes may influence its efficacy and toxicity in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. In addition, the ability of cells to accumulate methotrexate polyglutamates (MTXPG), important metabolites of MTX, is an important determinant of the effects of the drug. Candidate genes that have been explored for an effect on the efficacy or toxicity of MTX include methionine synthase,[32](#ref32) methionine synthase reductase,[33](#ref33) adenosine 2A receptor,[34](#ref34) dihydrofolate reductase,[35](#ref35) 5‐aminoimidazole‐4‐carboxamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase transformylase,[36](#ref36),[37](#ref37) aldehyde oxidase,[38](#ref38),[39](#ref39) ATP‐binding cassette,[28](#ref28) reduced folate carrier,[37](#ref37) folylpolyglutamyl synthase (FPGS),[28](#ref28) thymidylate synthetase,[28](#ref28),[37](#ref37) adenosine monophosphate deaminase‐1, adenosine deaminase‐1 and others. In a cross‐sectional study of 102 patients with rheumatoid arthritis (race/ethnicity unspecified) on low‐dose MTX for at least 3 months, Dervieux *et al*[37](#ref37) showed that a combination of common genetic polymorphisms in reduced folate carrier‐1 (*SLC19A1*), aminoimidazole‐4‐carboxamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase transformylase (*ATIC*), and thymidylate synthetase (*TYMS*) and MTX polyglutamate levels in RBCs influences the effect of MTX in rheumatoid arthritis.

Evans *et al*[40](#ref40) found that acute lymphoblastic leukaemia subtype‐specific patterns of folate pathway gene expression were significantly related to MTXPG accumulation. They found that lower MTXPG accumulation in these acute lymphoblastic leukaemia subtypes correlated with lower expression of the reduced folate carriers (*SLC19A1*, an MTX uptake transporter), higher expression of breast cancer resistance protein (ABCG2, an MTX efflux transporter) and lower expression of folylpoly glutomyl synthese (which catalyses the formation of MTXPG). The role of SNPs in these genes in the efficacy and toxicity of MTX in rheumatoid arthritis is unknown. Further studies are needed to clearly define the functional role of SNPs and haplotypes in candidate genes, and differences in allele frequencies according to race or ethnicity, to move forward to the goal of providing useful pharmacogenetic markers for all patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

In conclusion, our results highlight racial or ethnic differences in frequencies of common *MTHFR* SNPs. The *MTHFR* 1298 A allele was associated with MTX‐related adverse events in Caucasians, whereas the rs4846051 C allele appears to be related to MTX toxicity in African‐Americans. These findings should be tested in larger, prospective studies of MTX in rheumatoid arthritis. The rs4846051 SNP, which is more common in African‐Americans than Caucasians, may prove to be a useful ancestry informative marker in future studies on genetic admixture.

## Acknowledgements

This research was supported by grant P60 AR 48095 from the National Institute of Arthritis, Musculoskeletal, and Skin Diseases. We thank Y Zhu and J Wang for their technical assistance, and J Leff, J Whitmore, B Finck, G Means, J Derry, M Lange and J Sims for their assistance with this study. We also thank Drs R Kimberly and J Edberg for providing DNA samples on normal controls.

## Abbreviations

ACR - American College of Radiology

cDNA - complementary DNA

DAS28 - 28‐joint Disease Activity Score

ERA - early rheumatoid arthritis

MTHFR - methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase

MTX - methotrexate

MTXPG - methotrexate polyglutamate

PCR - polymerase chain reaction

SNP - single‐nucleotide polymorphism

UAB - University of Alabama at Birmingham

## Footnotes

## References

1. Alarcon G S. Methotrexate use in rheumatoid arthritis. A clinician's perspective. Immunopharmacology 200047259–271.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0162-3109(00)00184-3) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10878293/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Immunopharmacology&volume=47&publication_year=2000&pages=259-271&pmid=10878293&doi=10.1016/s0162-3109(00)00184-3&)

2. Kremer J M. Rational use of new and existing disease‐modifying agents in rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Intern Med 2001134695–706.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-134-8-200104170-00013) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11304108/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann%20Intern%20Med&volume=134&publication_year=2001&pages=695-706&pmid=11304108&doi=10.7326/0003-4819-134-8-200104170-00013&)

3. Chan E S, Cronstein B N. Molecular action of methotrexate in inflammatory diseases. Arthritis Res 20024266–273.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/ar419) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC128935/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12106498/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Arthritis%20Res&volume=4&publication_year=2002&pages=266-273&pmid=12106498&doi=10.1186/ar419&)

4. Morabito L, Montesinos M C, Schreibman D M, Balter L, Thompson L F, Resta R.et al Methotrexate and sulfasalazine promote adenosine release by a mechanism that requires ecto‐5′‐nucleotidase‐mediated conversion of adenine nucleotides. J Clin Invest 1998101295–300.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI1554) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC508567/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9435300/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Invest&volume=101&publication_year=1998&pages=295-300&pmid=9435300&doi=10.1172/JCI1554&)

5. Goyette P, Pai A, Milos R, Frosst P, Tran P, Chen Z.et al Gene structure of human and mouse methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR). Mamm Genome 19989652–656.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s003359900838) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9680386/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mamm%20Genome&volume=9&publication_year=1998&pages=652-656&pmid=9680386&doi=10.1007/s003359900838&)

6. Schubert H L, Blumenthal R M, Cheng X. Many paths to methyltransfer: a chronicle of convergence. Trends Biochem Sci 200328329–335.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0968-0004(03)00090-2) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2758044/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12826405/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Trends%20Biochem%20Sci&volume=28&publication_year=2003&pages=329-335&pmid=12826405&doi=10.1016/S0968-0004(03)00090-2&)

7. Kim R J, Becker R C. Association between factor V Leiden, prothrombin G20210A, and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase C677T mutations and events of the arterial circulatory system: a meta‐analysis of published studies. Am Heart J 2003146948–957.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0002-8703(03)00519-2) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14660985/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20Heart%20J&volume=146&publication_year=2003&pages=948-957&pmid=14660985&doi=10.1016/S0002-8703(03)00519-2&)

8. Gos M, Jr, Szpecht‐Potocka A. Genetic basis of neural tube defects. II. Genes correlated with folate and methionine metabolism. J Appl Genet 200243511–524.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12441636/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Appl%20Genet&volume=43&publication_year=2002&pages=511-524&pmid=12441636&)

9. Schwahn B, Rozen R. Polymorphisms in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene: clinical consequences. Am J Pharmacogenomics 20011189–201.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2165/00129785-200101030-00004) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12083967/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Pharmacogenomics&volume=1&publication_year=2001&pages=189-201&pmid=12083967&doi=10.2165/00129785-200101030-00004&)

10. Bailey L B. Folate, methyl‐related nutrients, alcohol, and the MTHFR 677C→T polymorphism affect cancer risk: intake recommendations. J Nutr 2003133(Suppl 1)3748–53S.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jn/133.11.3748S) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14608109/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Nutr&volume=133&publication_year=2003&pages=3748-53S&pmid=14608109&doi=10.1093/jn/133.11.3748S&)

11. Stegmann K, Ziegler A, Ngo E T, Kohlschmidt N, Schroter B, Ermert A.et al Linkage disequilibrium of MTHFR genotypes 677C/T‐1298A/C in the German population and association studies in probands with neural tube defects(NTD). Am J Med Genet 19998723–29.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10528242/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Med%20Genet&volume=87&publication_year=1999&pages=23-29&pmid=10528242&)

12. Rosenberg N, Murata M, Ikeda Y, Opare‐Sem O, Zivelin A, Geffen E.et al The frequent 5,10‐methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase C677T polymorphism is associated with a common haplotype in whites, Japanese, and Africans. Am J Hum Genet 200270758–762.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/338932) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC384952/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11781870/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Hum%20Genet&volume=70&publication_year=2002&pages=758-762&pmid=11781870&doi=10.1086/338932&)

13. van der Put N M, Gabreels F, Stevens E M, Smeitink J A, Trijbels F J, Eskes T K.et al A second common mutation in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene: an additional risk factor for neural‐tube defects? Am J Hum Genet 1998621044–1051.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/301825) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1377082/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9545395/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Hum%20Genet&volume=62&publication_year=1998&pages=1044-1051&pmid=9545395&doi=10.1086/301825&)

14. van Ede A E, Laan R F, Blom H J, Huizinga T W, Haagsma C J, Giesendorf B A.et al The C677T mutation in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene: a genetic risk factor for methotrexate‐related elevation of liver enzymes in rheumatoid arthritis patients. Arthritis Rheum 2001442525–2530.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/1529-0131(200111)44:11<2525::aid-art432>3.0.co;2-b) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11710708/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Arthritis%20Rheum&volume=44&publication_year=2001&pages=2525-2530&pmid=11710708&doi=10.1002/1529-0131(200111)44:11<2525::aid-art432>3.0.co;2-b&)

15. Urano W, Taniguchi A, Yamanaka H, Tanaka E, Nakajima H, Matsuda Y.et al Polymorphisms in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene were associated with both the efficacy and the toxicity of methotrexate used for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, as evidenced by single locus and haplotype analyses. Pharmacogenetics 200212183–190.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/00008571-200204000-00002) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11927833/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenetics&volume=12&publication_year=2002&pages=183-190&pmid=11927833&doi=10.1097/00008571-200204000-00002&)

16. Berkun Y, Levartovsky D, Rubinow A, Orbach H, Aamar S, Grenader T.et al Methotrexate related adverse effects in patients with rheumatoid arthritis are associated with the A1298C polymorphism of the MTHFR gene. Ann Rheum Dis 2004631227–1231.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/ard.2003.016337) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1754756/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15361376/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann%20Rheum%20Dis&volume=63&publication_year=2004&pages=1227-1231&pmid=15361376&doi=10.1136/ard.2003.016337&)

17. Arnett F C, Edworthy S M, Bloch D A, McShane D J, Fries J F, Cooper N S.et al The American Rheumatism Association 1987 revised criteria for the classification of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 198831315–324.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.1780310302) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3358796/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Arthritis%20Rheum&volume=31&publication_year=1988&pages=315-324&pmid=3358796&doi=10.1002/art.1780310302&)

18. Bridges S L, Jr, Jenq G, Moran M, Kuffner T, Whitworth W C, McNicholl J. Single‐nucleotide polymorphisms in tumor necrosis factor receptor genes: definition of novel haplotypes and racial/ethnic differences. Arthritis Rheum 2002462045–2050.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.10463) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12209507/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Arthritis%20Rheum&volume=46&publication_year=2002&pages=2045-2050&pmid=12209507&doi=10.1002/art.10463&)

19. Saag K G, Kolluri S, Koehnke R K, Georgou T A, Rachow J W, Hunninghake G W.et al Rheumatoid arthritis lung disease. Determinants of radiographic and physiologic abnormalities. Arthritis Rheum 1996391711–1719.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.1780391014) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8843862/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Arthritis%20Rheum&volume=39&publication_year=1996&pages=1711-1719&pmid=8843862&doi=10.1002/art.1780391014&)

20. Morgan S L, Baggott J E, Vaughn W H, Austin J S, Veitch T A, Lee J Y.et al Supplementation with folic acid during methotrexate therapy for rheumatoid arthritis: a double‐blind, placebo‐controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1994121833–841.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-121-11-199412010-00002) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7978695/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann%20Intern%20Med&volume=121&publication_year=1994&pages=833-841&pmid=7978695&doi=10.7326/0003-4819-121-11-199412010-00002&)

21. Bathon J M, Martin R W, Fleischmann R M, Tesser J R, Schiff M H, Keystone E C.et al A comparison of etanercept and methotrexate in patients with early rheumatoid arthritis. New Engl J Med 20003431586–1593.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM200011303432201) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11096165/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=New%20Engl%20J%20Med&volume=343&publication_year=2000&pages=1586-1593&pmid=11096165&doi=10.1056/NEJM200011303432201&)

22. Felson D T, Anderson J J, Boers M, Bombardier C, Furst D, Goldsmith C.et al American College of Rheumatology. Preliminary definition of improvement in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 199538727–735.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.1780380602) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7779114/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Arthritis%20Rheum&volume=38&publication_year=1995&pages=727-735&pmid=7779114&doi=10.1002/art.1780380602&)

23. Prevoo M L, ‘t Hof M A, Kuper H H, van Leeuwen M A, van de Putte L B, van Riel P L. Modified disease activity scores that include twenty‐eight‐joint counts. Development and validation in a prospective longitudinal study of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 19953844–48.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.1780380107) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7818570/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Arthritis%20Rheum&volume=38&publication_year=1995&pages=44-48&pmid=7818570&doi=10.1002/art.1780380107&)

24. Sell S M, Lugemwa P R. Development of a highly accurate, rapid PCR‐RFLP genotyping assay for the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene. Genet Testing 19993287–289.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1089/109065799316608) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10495928/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genet%20Testing&volume=3&publication_year=1999&pages=287-289&pmid=10495928&doi=10.1089/109065799316608&)

25. Stephens M, Smith N J, Donnelly P. A new statistical method for haplotype reconstruction from population data. Am J Hum Genet 200168978–989.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/319501) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1275651/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11254454/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Hum%20Genet&volume=68&publication_year=2001&pages=978-989&pmid=11254454&doi=10.1086/319501&)

26. Excoffier L, Slatkin M. Maximum‐likelihood estimation of molecular haplotype frequencies in a diploid population. Mol Biol Evol 199512921–927.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a040269) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7476138/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Biol%20Evol&volume=12&publication_year=1995&pages=921-927&pmid=7476138&doi=10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a040269&)

27. Slatkin M, Excoffier L. Testing for linkage disequilibrium in genotypic data using the Expectation‐Maximization algorithm. Heredity 199676(Pt 4)377–383.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/hdy.1996.55) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8626222/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Heredity&volume=76&publication_year=1996&pages=377-383&pmid=8626222&doi=10.1038/hdy.1996.55&)

28. Ranganathan P, Culverhouse R, Marsh S, Ahluwalia R, Shannon W D, Eisen S.et al Single nucleotide polymorphism profiling across the methotrexate pathway in normal subjects and patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Pharmacogenomics 20045559–569.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1517/14622416.5.5.559) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15212592/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics&volume=5&publication_year=2004&pages=559-569&pmid=15212592&doi=10.1517/14622416.5.5.559&)

29. Parra E J, Marcini A, Akey J, Martinson J, Batzer M A, Cooper R.et al Estimating African American admixture proportions by use of population‐specific alleles. Am J Hum Genet 1998631839–1851.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/302148) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1377655/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9837836/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Hum%20Genet&volume=63&publication_year=1998&pages=1839-1851&pmid=9837836&doi=10.1086/302148&)

30. Khanna D, Park G S, Paulus H E, Simpson K M, Elashoff D, Cohen S B.et al Reduction of the efficacy of methotrexate by the use of folic acid: post hoc analysis from two randomized controlled studies. Arthritis Rheum 2005523030–3038.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.21295) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16200612/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Arthritis%20Rheum&volume=52&publication_year=2005&pages=3030-3038&pmid=16200612&doi=10.1002/art.21295&)

31. Bridges S L, Jr, Hughes L B, Mikuls T R, Howard G, Tiwari H K, Alarcon G S.et al Early rheumatoid arthritis in African‐Americans: the CLEAR registry. Clin Exp Rheumatol 200321(Suppl 31)S138–S145.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14969066/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Exp%20Rheumatol&volume=21&publication_year=2003&pages=S138-S145&pmid=14969066&)

32. Leclerc D, Odievre M, Wu Q, Wilson A, Huizenga J J, Rozen R.et al Molecular cloning, expression and physical mapping of the human methionine synthase reductase gene. Gene 199924075–88.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0378-1119(99)00431-x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10564814/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gene&volume=240&publication_year=1999&pages=75-88&pmid=10564814&doi=10.1016/s0378-1119(99)00431-x&)

33. Hobbs C A, Sherman S L, Yi P, Hopkins S E, Torfs C P, Hine R J.et al Polymorphisms in genes involved in folate metabolism as maternal risk factors for down syndrome. Am J Hum Genet 200067623–630.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/303055) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1287522/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10930360/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Hum%20Genet&volume=67&publication_year=2000&pages=623-630&pmid=10930360&doi=10.1086/303055&)

34. Cronstein B N, Naime D, Ostad E. The antiinflammatory mechanism of methotrexate. Increased adenosine release at inflamed sites diminishes leukocyte accumulation in an in vivo model of inflammation. J Clin Invest 1993922675–2682.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI116884) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC288465/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8254024/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Invest&volume=92&publication_year=1993&pages=2675-2682&pmid=8254024&doi=10.1172/JCI116884&)

35. Singer M J, Mesner L D, Friedman C L, Trask B J, Hamlin J L. Amplification of the human dihydrofolate reductase gene via double minutes is initiated by chromosome breaks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000977921–7926.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.130194897) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC16646/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10859355/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&volume=97&publication_year=2000&pages=7921-7926&pmid=10859355&doi=10.1073/pnas.130194897&)

36. Rayl E A, Moroson B A, Beardsley G P. The human purH gene product, 5‐aminoimidazole‐4‐carboxamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase/IMP cyclohydrolase. Cloning, sequencing, expression, purification, kinetic analysis, and domain mapping. J Biol Chem 19962712225–2233.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.4.2225) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8567683/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Biol%20Chem&volume=271&publication_year=1996&pages=2225-2233&pmid=8567683&doi=10.1074/jbc.271.4.2225&)

37. Dervieux T, Furst D, Lein D O, Capps R, Smith K, Walsh M.et al Polyglutamation of methotrexate with common polymorphisms in reduced folate carrier, aminoimidazole carboxamide ribonucleotide transformylase, and thymidylate synthase are associated with methotrexate effects in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2004502766–2774.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.20460) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15457444/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Arthritis%20Rheum&volume=50&publication_year=2004&pages=2766-2774&pmid=15457444&doi=10.1002/art.20460&)

38. Terao M, Kurosaki M, Demontis S, Zanotta S, Garattini E. Isolation and characterization of the human aldehyde oxidase gene: conservation of intron/exon boundaries with the xanthine oxidoreductase gene indicates a common origin. Biochem J 1998332(Pt 2)383–393.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1042/bj3320383) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1219493/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9601067/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biochem%20J&volume=332&publication_year=1998&pages=383-393&pmid=9601067&doi=10.1042/bj3320383&)

39. Baggott J E, Bridges S L, Jr, Morgan S L. Evidence for two phenotypes in the metabolism of methotrexate to 7‐hydroxymethotrexate in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 200552356–358.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.20742) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15641087/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Arthritis%20Rheum&volume=52&publication_year=2005&pages=356-358&pmid=15641087&doi=10.1002/art.20742&)

40. Kager L, Cheok M, Yang W, Zaza G, Cheng Q, Panetta J C.et al Folate pathway gene expression differs in subtypes of acute lymphoblastic leukemia and influences methotrexate pharmacodynamics. J Clin Invest 2005115110–117.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI22477) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC539195/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15630450/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Invest&volume=115&publication_year=2005&pages=110-117&pmid=15630450&doi=10.1172/JCI22477&)
