# GWAS study of myelosuppression among NSCLC patients receiving platinum-based combination chemotherapy: GWAS study: endomucin’s role in NSCLC myelosuppression

## Metadata
**Authors:** Hanxue Huang, Junyan Liu, Qi Xiao, Chenxue Mao, Lei She, Lulu Yu, Bing Yu, Mengrong Lei, Ying Gao, Baimei He, Pinhua Pan, Xi Li, Jiye Yin, Zhaoqian Liu
**Journal:** Acta Biochimica et Biophysica Sinica
**Date:** 2025 Apr 28
**DOI:** [10.3724/abbs.2025013](https://doi.org/10.3724/abbs.2025013)
**PMID:** 40296719
**PMCID:** PMC12368523
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12368523/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12368523/pdf/1672-9145-2025-57-8-1281.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12368523/pdf/1672-9145-2025-57-8-1281.pdf)

## Abstract

Platinum-based chemotherapy remains the mainstay for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), but it frequently causes dose-limiting myelosuppression, with significant individual variability in susceptibility. However, the genetic basis of myelosuppression side effects remains elusive, greatly hindering personalized therapeutic approaches. In this study, we perform a comprehensive genome-wide association analysis on 491 NSCLC patients receiving platinum-based chemotherapy, examining 4,690,998 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to identify relevant genetic variants. LDBlockShow, FUMA, and MAGMA are utilized to explore linkage disequilibrium, expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs), chromatin interaction, and conduct gene-based and gene set-based analysis of candidate SNPs. The GWAS results reveal that rs6856089 and its linked SNPs are significantly associated with platinum-based chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression. Specifically, patients with the A allele of rs6856089 have a significantly lower risk of myelosuppression [odds ratio (OR) = 0.1300, P = 7.59 × 10 –8]. Furthermore, gene-based analysis reveals that EMCN ( P = 2.47 × 10 –5), which encodes endomucin, a marker for hematopoietic stem cells, might mediate myelosuppression. This study provides a scientific basis for the individual differences in platinum-based chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression.

Keywords: genome-wide association analysis, non-small cell lung cancer, platinum-based chemotherapy, myelosuppression, EMCN

## Introduction

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), accounting for 80% of lung cancer cases, poses a significant threat to human health owing to its high prevalence and mortality rates [ [1](#REF1), [2](#REF2)]. Platinum-based chemotherapy, particularly cisplatin and carboplatin, remains the cornerstone treatment for NSCLC. These agents can inhibit DNA replication by binding to DNA, forming adducts, and destroying tumor cells [[3]](#REF3). However, the effectiveness of platinum-based chemotherapy is limited by severe side effects, including myelosuppression, nephrotoxicity, and neurotoxicity [ [4](#REF4), [5](#REF5)], of which myelosuppression is a significant concern because of its high incidence and serious outcomes. The occurrence of myelosuppression not only leads to a reduced dosage or delayed treatment but also impacts the prognosis and quality of life of patients [[6]](#REF6). The bone marrow is the primary site for blood cell production and contains numerous rapidly dividing hematopoietic stem cells. Platinum-based chemotherapy can severely impact the proliferation of bone marrow progenitors through its ability to inhibit DNA replication, disrupting hematopoiesis. This severe adverse effect is clinically characterized by leukopenia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia [[7]](#REF7) and is graded from I to IV according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE).

Susceptibility to platinum-based chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression varies greatly among individuals, underscoring the need to identify predictive biomarkers. Pharmacogenomic studies hold promise in identifying genetic variants associated with drug response, including both efficacy and side effects [[8]](#REF8). However, current methods for predicting chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression are insufficient, warranting further relevant studies. Previous studies by our group and others have demonstrated that genetic variation plays a fundamental role in inter-individual variability in drug efficacy and side effects [ [9](#REF9)– [17](#REF17)]. Nonetheless, the specific underlying mechanism of platinum-based chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression has yet to be elucidated.

The present study sought to identify genetic variants associated with myelosuppression in NSCLC patients treated with cisplatin or carboplatin. A genome-wide association study (GWAS) was conducted on 491 NSCLC patients of Chinese Han ancestry. The germline genetic contribution to platinum-based chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression was investigated. Moreover, the potential functions of the identified single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were explored through linkage disequilibrium (LD), expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs), and chromatin interactions. Additionally, gene-based and gene set-based association analyses were performed, providing deeper insights into the mechanisms underlying platinum-induced myelosuppression.

## Materials and Methods

### Study population and data collection

Patients who were diagnosed with NSCLC at Xiangya Hospital of Central South University between 2012 and 2019 were recruited. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Clinical Pharmacology Research Institute of Central South University (number: CTXY-110008-1). All participants provided written informed consent. Eligible patients met the following criteria: histopathological diagnosis of NSCLC and receiving 2–6 cycles of cisplatin- or carboplatin-based chemotherapy, following the regimens described in our previous study [[17]](#REF17). Patients who had received prior anti-tumor therapy (surgery, targeted agents, or radiotherapy) or who had significant disease were excluded. The clinical data collected included pathological type, stage, age, sex, smoking history, and treatment details such as treatment cycle, regimen, dose, and occurrence of adverse events. This study was registered in the Chinese Clinical Trial Register (registration number: ChiCTR-RO-12002873).

Patients underwent blood cell counts at least twice weekly throughout the treatment course. At the end of a treatment cycle, myelosuppression side effects were evaluated via the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 5.0 from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The criteria were as follows: (1) white blood cells (× 10 ^9^/L): Grade 0: > 4.0, Grade 1: 3.0--3.9, Grade 2: 2.0--2.9, Grade 3: 1.0--1.9, and Grade 4: < 1.0; (2) neutrophils (× 10 ^9^/L): Grade 0: > 2.0, Grade 1: 1.5–1.9, Grade 2: 1.0–1.5, Grade 3: 0.5–0.9, and Grade 4: < 0.5; (3) platelets (× 10 ^9^/L): Grade 0: > 99, Grade 1: 75--99, Grade 2: 50--74, Grade 3: 25--49, and Grade 4: < 25. On the basis of the clinical evidence in this study, a decrease in leukocytes, neutrophils, or platelets during the fourth cycle of platinum-based chemotherapy represents myelotoxicity.

### Genotyping, imputation, and quality control

DNA samples from 491 platinum-treated NSCLC patients were genotyped via the Infinium Global Array Screening Array-24 v1.0 (GSA) BeadChip (Illumina, San Diego, USA). Raw data processing and genotype calling were performed via GenomeStudio software (Illumina). Consequently, genotype information for 688,783 SNPs was obtained. Stringent quality control (QC) measures were implemented via PLINK (version 1.9) [[18]](#REF18) to ensure the integrity and reliability of the genotyped data. For the genotyping data, QC was applied at both the sample and variant levels. The sample QC conditions included: (1) a sample call rate ≥ 95%; (2) the absence of consanguinity or abnormal heterozygosity; and (3) the absence of sex mismatch or population heterogeneity. The SNP QC conditions included the following: (1) SNP call rate ≥ 95%; (2) compliance with Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE > 1 × 10 ^–4^); (3) minor allele frequency (MAF) > 0.01; and (4) SNPs located on autosomal chromosomes. Missing genotypes were imputed to improve the power and precision of the genotype association analyses. The 1000 Genomes Phase 3 v5 reference dataset served as the basis for haplotype analysis, followed by haploid phasing with SHAPEIT software [[19]](#REF19). IMPUTE2 [[20]](#REF20) was subsequently used to fill in missing SNPs within chromosomal subintervals, resulting in a total of 4,690,998 variants.

### Genome-wide data analysis

Principal component analysis (PCA) was conducted via PLINK to identify potential population substructures and outlier patients. As a case-control study, a binary logistic regression analysis was conducted via SPSS (version 26.0; IBM) to evaluate the relationships between clinical variables and myelosuppression. Clinical variables significantly associated with myelosuppression were included as covariates in subsequent GWAS via logistic regression in PLINK. The optimal model of GWAS results was determined via the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) in SNPStats ( [https://www.snpstats.net/start.htm](https://www.snpstats.net/start.htm)). The GWAS results were visualized via quantitative and Manhattan plots generated with the R package “qqman”.

### Bioinformatics and statistical analysis

The descriptive statistics were calculated via SPSS. Clinical categorical variables are summarized as numbers, and continuous variables are presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD). Student’s *t* test was used to compare continuous variables with normality and homogeneity, whereas binary and multi-category variables were compared via the chi-square test and Fisher’s exact test. The categorical variables were coded as dummy variables for the binary logistic regression model. LD and haplotype analyses were conducted via PLINK and LDBlockShow 1.33 software [[21]](#REF21). Regional plots and gene maps were generated via LocusZoom [[22]](#REF22). Gene enrichment analyses were conducted via the Multi-Marker Analysis of GenoMic Annotation (MAGMA) tool (version 1.10) [[23]](#REF23). Functional mapping and variant annotation were performed via FUMA [[24]](#REF24). The overall methodological workflow for data analysis is illustrated in [Figure 1](#FIG1)A.

### Figure 1 .

![
Figure 1
](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/5117/12368523/d545bfdeab36/ABBS-2024-670-t1.jpg)

[View larger image](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click%20on%20image%20to%20zoom&p=PMC3&id=12368523_ABBS-2024-670-t1.jpg)

Comprehensive workflow (A) Methodological workflow of the study. (B) Screening process for two platinum-based chemotherapy group samples.

## Results

### Clinical characteristics associated with myelosuppression in NSCLC patients

Strict inclusion and exclusion criteria were applied for patients with myelosuppression following platinum-based chemotherapy treatment to ensure data quality and reliability. [Figure 1](#FIG1)B shows a flowchart of the patient enrollment process. A total of 203 patients in the carboplatin group were initially recruited. After patients who did not undergo toxicity assessment, had poor DNA quality control (QC), or had a genotyping call rate below 95% were excluded, 159 patients were included in the final analysis. The initial cisplatin group included 288 patients, and after the same criteria were applied, 232 patients were included in the final analysis. Overall, 391 patients were included in the final analysis. The baseline clinical characteristics and demographics of the patients are summarized in [Table 1](#TBL1), which shows a similar distribution of most characteristics between patients in the myelosuppression group and those in the non-myelosuppression group. No significant differences in histology, cancer stage, age, or sex were observed between controls and patients with myelotoxicity ( *P* _Histology_ = 0.121, *P* _Stage_ = 0.683, *P* _Age_ = 0.357, *P* _Sex_ = 0.289), and smoking status showed borderline significance between the two groups ( *P* = 0.112). However, the treatment regimens differed between patients in the myelosuppression group and those in the non-myelosuppression group ( *P* = 0.019), with platinum combined with pemetrexed being the most commonly used regimen in the non-myelosuppression group and platinum combined with gemcitabine being the most common in the myelosuppression group. Among all the patients, 148 had leukopenia after platinum treatment, 154 had neutropenia, and 57 had thrombocytopenia. Moreover, binary logistic regression was further employed to identify covariates included in the GWAS, and smoking status and treatment regimens were included to analyze genetic variants associated with platinum-induced myelotoxicity ( *P* _Smoke_ = 0.021, *P* _Regimens_ = 0.019).

| Characteristics | Non-myelosuppression | Myelosuppression | P |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Histology |   |   | 0.121 |
| Adenocarcinoma | 94 | 104 |   |
| Squamous | 68 | 113 |   |
| Other | 4 | 8 |   |
| Stage |   |   | 0.683 |
| I | 0 | 2 |   |
| II | 2 | 3 |   |
| III | 49 | 66 |   |
| IV | 115 | 154 |   |
| Age* | 56.23 (9.17) | 57.08 (9.00) | 0.357 |
| Smoking status |   |   | 0.112 |
| Nonsmoker | 45 | 78 |   |
| Smoker | 121 | 147 |   |
| Sex |   |   | 0.289 |
| Male | 135 | 173 |   |
| Female | 31 | 52 |   |
| Chemotherapeutic regimens |   | 0.019 |  |
| platinum | 0 | 0 |   |
| platinum/pemetrexed | 87 | 90 |   |
| platinum/gemcitabine | 49 | 100 |   |
| platinum/paclitaxel | 20 | 27 |   |
| platinum/docetaxel | 10 | 8 |   |
| Toxicity types |   |   |   |
| leukopenia |   | 185 |   |
| neutropenia |   | 154 |   |
| thrombocytopenia |   | 57 |   |

Table Caption: Table 1 Baseline clinical characteristics of the patients

### Identification of significant SNPs associated with myelosuppression

Before the associations between platinum-based treatment-induced myelotoxicity and genetic variants were analyzed, PCA was first used to assess patient population structure and outliers. As shown in [Figure 2](#FIG2)A, the PCA results revealed that the first principal component (PC1) and the second principal component (PC2) explained 34.33% and 33.26% of the total variation in the data, respectively. The studied population was ethnically homogenous and had no outlier patients, confirming that the difference in myelosuppression between the two groups of patients was not driven by underlying population stratification. Moreover, additive logistic regression of the myelotoxicity phenotype and relevant covariates in the GWAS analysis was performed. The quantile-quantile (Q-Q) and Manhattan plots of these association results are presented in [Figure 2](#FIG2)B,C. The Q-Q plot revealed no genome inflation, and the inflation factor (λ) was 1.016. The Manhattan plot revealed many significant loci residing on chromosome 4q24. Variants with *P* < 1 × 10 ^–7^ are presented in [Table 2](#TBL2), and the most significant locus was rs6856089 [ *P* = 7.59 × 10 ^–8^, odds ratio (OR) = 0.1300, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.062--0.274]. This SNP exhibited a strong protective effect, suggesting that patients who carry this variant have a substantially decreased risk of developing myelotoxicity after platinum-based chemotherapy.

### Figure 2 .

![
Figure 2
](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/5117/12368523/b6a15c5e08e8/ABBS-2024-670-t2.jpg)

[View larger image](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click%20on%20image%20to%20zoom&p=PMC3&id=12368523_ABBS-2024-670-t2.jpg)

Single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based genome-wide association study (GWAS) results for platinum-based chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression (A) SNP-based principal component analysis of the population structure of the 391 patients with non-small cell lung cancer. (B,C) Quantile-quantile (B) and Manhattan (C) plots of the GWAS summary results, displaying the ‒log10(P value). The blue line marks the suggestive genome-wide significance threshold (P < 1 × 10–7).

| rsID | CHR | BP | Annotation | Alt | Ref | Alt Freq | OR | P |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| rs6856089 | 4 | 101248370 | intergenic | A | G | 0.0668 | 0.1300 | 7.59 × 10 –8 |
| rs6419152 | 4 | 101250394 | intergenic | C | T | 0.0691 | 0.1300 | 7.59 × 10 –8 |
| rs7689513 | 4 | 101250409 | intergenic | T | C | 0.0691 | 0.1300 | 7.59 × 10 –8 |
| rs11097709 | 4 | 101251778 | intergenic | C | T | 0.0691 | 0.1300 | 7.59 × 10 –8 |
| rs6532856 | 4 | 101253557 | intergenic | G | C | 0.0691 | 0.1300 | 7.59 × 10 –8 |
| rs357656 | 4 | 101385503 | EMCN Intron | C | T | 0.0746 | 0.1469 | 7.65 × 10 –8 |
| rs4574421 | 4 | 101254074 | intergenic | T | G | 0.0692 | 0.1305 | 8.09 × 10 –8 |

Table Caption: Table 2 Leading SNPs associated with platinum-based chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression

Since our clinical cohort included patients treated with a variety of chemotherapeutic agents, including gemcitabine, which has been reported to have significant myelosuppressive effects, we conducted additional GWAS on two subgroups of patients who did not receive gemcitabine and patients who were treated with platinum combined with gemcitabine. These analyses were performed to ensure that the observed associations were specific to platinum-based chemotherapy and not confounded by gemcitabine. In the GWAS of the non-gemcitabine platinum group, rs6856089 remained the most significant variant ( *P* = 8.94 × 10 ^–9^, OR = 0.1584), suggesting an independent association between rs6856089 and platinum-induced myelosuppression ( [Supplementary Figure S1](https://www.sciengine.com/10.3724/abbs.2025013)A,B and [Supplementary Table S1](https://www.sciengine.com/10.3724/abbs.2025013)). In the GWAS of the subgroup treated with platinum combined with gemcitabine, while rs6856089 was still detectable ( *P* = 5.29 × 10 ^‒7^, OR = 0.0926), its significance appeared primarily due to the influence of platinum. However, this difference was markedly lower than that in both the overall cohort and the non-gemcitabine platinum group. Furthermore, we identified a novel significant locus at rs1522860 on chromosome 2 in the platinum combined with gemcitabine group, which was not detected in the non-gemcitabine combination group. These findings suggest that this locus may be specifically associated with gemcitabine-induced myelosuppression ( [Supplementary Figure S1](https://www.sciengine.com/10.3724/abbs.2025013)C,D and [Supplementary Table S2](https://www.sciengine.com/10.3724/abbs.2025013)). These findings support the conclusion that rs6856089 is specifically associated with platinum-induced myelosuppression and not with gemcitabine-induced myelosuppression.

In addition to additive models, alleles can influence phenotypes through various modes of inheritance, such as dominant, recessive, hyperdominant, and codominant modes. Optimal selection of the inheritance model can increase the accuracy of phenotype prediction, facilitating a deeper comprehension of the genetic contribution to phenotypic traits. Thus, leading GWAS loci were assessed via multiple models, and these models were tested via the AIC and BIC. The logarithmic additive model showed the minimal fit parameters (AIC = 490.3, BIC = 514.1) ( [Table 3](#TBL3)), indicating that the best fitting model for the allelic effect is a linear additive mode of inheritance.

| Model | Genotype | Non-myelosuppression | Myelosuppression | OR (95%CI) | P | AIC | BIC |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Codominant | G/G | 125 (75.3%) | 213 (95.5%) | 1 | < 0.0001 | 492.3 | 520.1 |
|   | G/A | 40 (24.1%) | 10 (4.5%) | 0.13 (0.06–0.28) |   |   |   |
|   | A/A | 1 (0.06%) | 0 (0%) | NA |   |   |   |
| Dominant | G/G | 125 (75.3%) | 213 (95.5%) | 1 | < 0.0001 | 490.6 | 514.3 |
|   | G/A-A/A | 41 (24.7%) | 10 (4.5%) | 0.13 (0.06–0.27) |   |   |   |
| Recessive | G/G-G/A | 165 (99.4%) | 223 (100%) | 1 | 0.28 | 526.5 | 550.3 |
|   | A/A | 1 (0.06%) | 0 (0%) | NA |   |   |   |
| Overdominant | G/G-A/A | 126 (75.9) | 213 (95.5%) | 1 | < 0.0001 | 491.7 | 515.5 |
|   | G/A | 40 (24.1%) | 10 (4.5%) | 0.13 (0.06–0.28) |   |   |   |
| Log-additive | - | - | - | 0.13 (0.06–0.27) | < 0.0001 | 490.3 | 514.1 |

Table Caption: Table 3 AIC and BIC values for the models describing the relationship between rs6856089 and myelosuppression (adjusted by smoking status and chemotherapeutic regimens)

### Linkage disequilibrium and gene mapping highlight candidate genes for myelosuppression

A comprehensive LD analysis was conducted to characterize the genetic architecture of the identified risk loci. PLINK’s pairwise LD assessment function was utilized to examine the leading SNP rs6856089 against all SNPs within a 200 kb window. LD blocks were defined via Gabriel’s method, with high LD determined by an r² > 0.80. rs6856089 and loci of the *EMCN* gene (Endomucin) were in strong linkage disequilibrium ( [Figure 3](#FIG3)A). Notably, seven distinct LD blocks were identified in the region of interest. The lead SNP rs6856089 was located within the last block, which is a 9.9 kb region containing 222 SNPs. This critical block overlapped with the transcribed region of the *EMCN* gene. To further investigate this association, a 1 Mb regional association map centered on rs6856089 was generated via LocusZoom. The map demonstrated a strong association signal across the *EMCN* gene locus, with rs6856089 at its peak ( [Figure 3](#FIG3)B). Notably, the site of LD (r ^2^ > 0.6) for rs6856089 was located within the *EMCN* transcribed region, suggesting a potential functional relationship between the identified variants and *EMCN* gene expression or function. These findings provide valuable insights into the genetic structure of the 4q24 locus and highlight the importance of the *EMCN* gene.

### Figure 3 .

![
Figure 3
](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/5117/12368523/65682ccc40af/ABBS-2024-670-t3.jpg)

[View larger image](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click%20on%20image%20to%20zoom&p=PMC3&id=12368523_ABBS-2024-670-t3.jpg)

Linkage disequilibrium (LD) analysis and gene mapping of rs6856089 (A) LD blocks for 200 kb region around rs6856089 in 4q24. The y-axis represents the –log10(P) of SNP-based associations, and the x-axis indicates the genomic region. SNPs are color-coded based on their LD (r2) with rs6856089. The red line indicates the significance threshold (P < 1 × 10–6). (B) LocusZoom plot of the 1 MB region around rs6856089 and mapping genes. (C) Circos plot showing significant eQTL and chromatin interactions in chromosome 4. The outside layer displays a Manhattan plot of GWAS SNP results. The inner layer displays genes mapped by eQTLs and chromatin interaction. Orange links represent chromatin interaction, green links represent eQTLs, and red links represent both types of mapping approaches.

FUMA was used to detect eQTLs and chromatin interactions associated with candidate SNPs in the 4q24 region, and a Circos plot was generated ( [Figure 3](#FIG3)C). Among the identified associations, *EMCN* showed the most robust evidence, with variants acting as both eQTLs and sites of chromatin interaction. Specifically, the rs6856089 linkage SNP rs11940655 was identified as the most significant eQTL in Skin_Sun_Exposed_Lower_leg based on the GTEx/v7 dataset, with a *P* value of 4.24 × 10 ^–7^, and the T allele was associated with increased *EMCN* expression. Although rs6856089 did not reach the threshold for multiple testing correction, it had a significant normal regulatory effect on *EMCN* in Skin_Sun_Exposed_Lower_leg ( *P* = 6.35 × 10 ^–3^) and in Pancreas ( *P* = 0.033) based on GTEx/v8 dataset, and the A allele was associated with increased *EMCN* expression ( [Supplementary Figure S2](https://www.sciengine.com/10.3724/abbs.2025013)). Additionally, eQTL analysis highlighted other genes, including DnaJ heat shock protein family (Hsp40) member B14 ( *DNAJB14*) and DNA damage inducible transcript 4 like ( *DDIT4L*). Chromatin interaction data indicated that these loci interact with genes such as dual adaptor of phosphotyrosine and 3-phosphoinositides 1 ( *DAPP1*) and B-cell Scaffold protein with ankyrin repeats 1 ( *BANK1*). Furthermore, rs11940655 and several linked SNPs exhibited chromatin interactions with *EMCN* (false discovery rate (FDR) = 5.94 × 10 ^–52^) in Mesenchymal_Stem_Cell.

### Gene enrichment analysis reveals biological pathways involved in myelosuppression

A gene-based association study was performed via MAGMA to complement single-variant GWAS analysis. This approach allowed us to aggregate the effects of multiple SNPs at the gene level and uncover associations that may have been overlooked in the single-SNP analysis. A total of 17,375 protein-coding genes were analyzed, applying a Bonferroni-corrected significance threshold of *P* < 2.88 × 10 ^–6^ (0.05/17,375). As shown in [Figure 4](#FIG4)A,B, while no genes reached this stringent threshold, two genes that approached significance were identified. The most significant association was observed for *EMCN* (beta = 0.2052, *P* = 2.47 × 10 ^–5^), followed by Pleckstrin homology like domain family B member 2 ( *PHLDB2*; beta = 0.1887, *P* = 9.53 × 10 ^–5^) ( [Table 4](#TBL4)). These results indicate that the mutation frequency of these two genes is associated with myelosuppression induced by platinum-based chemotherapy.

### Figure 4 .

![
Figure 4
](https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/blobs/5117/12368523/69e511efc03e/ABBS-2024-670-t4.jpg)

[View larger image](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/lw/2.0/html/tileshop_pmc/tileshop_pmc_inline.html?title=Click%20on%20image%20to%20zoom&p=PMC3&id=12368523_ABBS-2024-670-t4.jpg)

Gene enrichment analysis by gene-based and gene set-based analysis (A,B) Manhattan (A) and Quantile-quantile (B) plots of gene-based association results. The blue line indicates the suggestive significance threshold (P < 1 × 10–4). (C–E) Gene set-based enrichment analysis of Gene Ontology, KEGG, and Reactome pathways. The top enriched pathways are presented for each dataset, and –log10(P) are color-coded for each significant pathway.

| Gene | Chr | Start | Stop | NSNPS | NPARAM | beta | P |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| EMCN | 4 | 101316498 | 101439250 | 232 | 10 | 0.2052 | 2.47 × 10 –5 |
| PHLDB2 | 3 | 111451327 | 111695364 | 592 | 25 | 0.1887 | 9.53 × 10 –5 |
| EMSY | 11 | 76155967 | 76263943 | 171 | 17 | 0.1779 | 2.17 × 10 –4 |
| STPG2 | 4 | 98480025 | 99064391 | 1461 | 11 | 0.1737 | 2.96 × 10 –4 |
| TARBP1 | 1 | 234527059 | 234614863 | 234 | 17 | 0.1722 | 3.30 × 10 –4 |
| CCDC27 | 1 | 3668965 | 3688209 | 18 | 4 | 0.1701 | 3.83 × 10 –4 |
| ICAM3 | 19 | 10444452 | 10450345 | 21 | 3 | 0.1669 | 4.83 × 10 –4 |
| TEX48 | 9 | 117428714 | 117444369 | 72 | 10 | 0.1669 | 4.84 × 10 –4 |
| COMMD8 | 4 | 47452815 | 47465676 | 15 | 2 | 0.1662 | 5.06 × 10 –4 |
| BCL9 | 1 | 147013222 | 147098022 | 115 | 12 | 0.1590 | 8.36 × 10 –4 |
| PLCXD2 | 3 | 111393523 | 111565294 | 317 | 21 | 0.1583 | 8.74 × 10 –4 |
| KIR3DL3 | 19 | 55235984 | 55248003 | 1 | 1 | 0.1580 | 8.90 × 10 –4 |
| KLHL28 | 14 | 45393527 | 45431179 | 47 | 2 | 0.1565 | 9.87 × 10 –4 |

Table Caption: Table 4 Gene-based association results for chemotherapy-related myelotoxicity

### Pathway-level insights from gene set enrichment analysis in myelosuppression

After conducting a gene-based analysis, we attempted to identify biological pathways and processes that may be enriched for genetic associations with myelotoxicity associated with platinum-based chemotherapeutics. A gene set-based analysis was performed via MAGMA to assess cumulative effects within functionally related gene sets. A total of 34,480 predefined gene sets from databases such as Gene Ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), and Reactome pathways were analyzed. The gene set-based analysis revealed several significant associations in the GO gene sets ( [Figure 4](#FIG4)C). Seven categories were under the “biological process”, two under “molecular function”, and one under “cellular component”. The most significant category was “regulation of collateral sprouting” (beta = 0.991, *P* = 1.35 × 10 ^–6^). Other important categories related to “biological process” were “regulation of hepatocyte proliferation”, “lipoprotein catabolic process”, and “response to fructose”. These categories, which represent crucial processes such as cell proliferation and energy metabolism, may be involved in the development of myelosuppression. In the KEGG gene sets ( [Figure 4](#FIG4)D), five cell cycle pathways were enriched, with “amplified MYC to P27 cell cycle G1/S” being the most significant pathway (beta = 0.865, *P* = 5.86 × 10 ^–4^). Other pathways, including “regulation of autophagy”, “tryptophan metabolism”, “HCMV US28 to GNAQ-PLCB/G-calcineurin signaling pathway”, and “non-canonical inflammasome signaling pathway”, were also implicated in the development of myelosuppression. Several significant pathways were also identified in the Reactome gene sets ( [Figure 4](#FIG4)E), among which “signaling by receptor tyrosine kinases” showed the most significant result (beta = 0.673, *P* = 4.74 × 10 ^–4^). Additionally, pathways such as “SUMOylating of immune response proteins”, “mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation”, and “integrin cell surface interactions” were also significantly enriched, suggesting that the immune response, cell adhesion, and metabolic processes play important roles in maintaining bone marrow homeostasis. The consistent positive enrichment values across all the pathways indicate that genetic variants in these pathways are associated with an increased risk of developing myelotoxicity after platinum-based chemotherapy.

## Discussion

In the present study, we performed a GWAS of 391 Chinese Han ancestry NSCLC patients (after QC) to gain deeper insights into the germline genetic factors influencing platinum-based chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression. Our findings suggest that germline genetic variants regulating the *EMCN* gene are implicated in the risk of developing myelosuppression.

Although previous pharmacogenomic studies have highlighted the contribution of genetic variants in response to platinum-based chemotherapy, the specific genetic factors underlying myelosuppression remain elusive. Cao *et al*. [[25]](#REF25) identified two SNPs, rs13014982 and rs9909179, which are linked to myelosuppression in NSCLC patients receiving platinum-based chemotherapy, of which rs9909179 acts as an eQTL for heparan sulfate-glucosamine 3-sulfotransferase 3A1 ( *HS3ST3A1*), potentially affecting hematopoiesis through acetyl heparinsulfate biosynthesis. Chu *et al*. [[26]](#REF26) investigated the associations between RAD18 E3 ubiquitin protein ligase ( *RAD18*) gene polymorphisms and platinum-based chemotherapeutic hematological toxicity in NSCLC patients via a candidate gene approach and reported that rs586014, rs654448, and rs618784 are significantly associated with hematological toxicity in non-smokers. However, rs6763823 and rs9880051 are significantly associated with leukopenia in smokers. Additionally, a meta-analysis conducted by Liu *et al*. [[27]](#REF27) revealed that rs1801133 in methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase ( *MTHFR*) is associated with severe hematological toxicity of platinum-based chemotherapy. Despite these advances, some studies have relied on the candidate gene approach, which may not fully explore the range of genetic variation involved. Therefore, we carried out a comprehensive GWAS to provide a broader and more systematic investigation of genetic variants associated with platinum-induced myelosuppression.

Standard platinum-based combination chemotherapy regimens encompass several combinations: platinum with pemetrexed, gemcitabine, docetaxel, or paclitaxel. While drug combinations can increase therapeutic efficacy, different regimens may significantly impact patients’ risk of adverse reactions. Among these drugs, the combination of gemcitabine and platinum has emerged as a widely used chemotherapy protocol across multiple cancer types. This regimen has demonstrated enhanced antitumor effectiveness through complementary mechanisms of action and non-overlapping toxicity profiles [[28]](#REF28). However, clinical trials have reported that gemcitabine monotherapy can cause mild to moderate myelosuppression, primarily thrombocytopenia and leukopenia [[29]](#REF29), and the combination of platinum with gemcitabine significantly intensifies these adverse effects [[30]](#REF30). In our study, the myelosuppression group had twice the frequency of gemcitabine combination therapy compared to the non-myelosuppression group. This elevated risk may be attributed to the cumulative toxic effects of combination therapy on bone marrow hematopoietic cells, resulting in increased incidences of leukopenia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia. Furthermore, the combination may affect the cell cycle, thereby inhibiting hematopoiesis. These findings underscore the importance of individualized treatment planning, particularly for high-risk patients such as elderly individuals or those with underlying hematopoietic dysfunction. When considering gemcitabine-platinum combinations for these populations, clinicians should implement enhanced monitoring protocols and prepare appropriate interventions throughout the treatment course.

Our SNP-based association analysis revealed significant links within the 4q24 region. Specifically, rs6856089 and its linked genetic variants in the *EMCN* gene are correlated with platinum-based chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression. Notably, the A allele of rs6856089 is associated with a decreased risk of myelosuppression in NSCLC patients (OR = 0.1300, 95% CI = 0.062–0.274). Our gene-based association analysis further highlighted the role of EMCN and revealed that EMCN are associated with myelosuppression. These findings suggest that *EMCN* may be crucial in mediating the susceptibility of NSCLC patients to platinum-based chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression.

The *EMCN* gene spans approximately 484.77 kb and is located on chromosome 4 at 4q24. It encodes a mucin-like sialoglycoprotein that produces endomucin, a marker specific to bone marrow endothelial cells (BMECs) and hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) [ [31](#REF31), [32](#REF32)]. *EMCN* is involved in the Gene Ontology Biological Process of HSC homeostasis (GO:0061484). It maintains a steady-state population of HSCs and plays a key role in maintaining endothelial barrier integrity and regulating vascular permeability. Myeloid cells are derived from HSCs and hematopoietic stem progenitor cells located in the hematopoietic microenvironment of the bone marrow near the outer surface of microvascular endothelial cells. The survival, self-renewal, and proliferation of BMECs and HSCs in the bone marrow microenvironment are crucial for maintaining bone marrow hematopoiesis. This microenvironment contains many different types of cells, such as BMECs, osteolineage cells, mesenchymal stem cells, neurons, the extracellular matrix, and various cytokines [[33]](#REF33).

BMECs are a key component of the hematopoietic microenvironment, exerting a critical influence on the regulation of HSCs through the secretion of various cytokines and direct contact. These interactions guarantee that HSCs remain in a quiescent state or are activated in response to multiple environments, such as under chemical stress or injury. The functional state of BMECs is crucial for the maintenance of hematopoietic homeostasis, and impaired BMEC function can affect the bone marrow microenvironment, leading to hematopoiesis dysfunction.

While there is currently a dearth of direct studies on the role of *EMCN* in bone marrow homeostasis, emerging evidence supports its potential involvement in this complex microenvironment. Kim *et al*. [[34]](#REF34) studied the function of EMCN ^+^ and EMCN ^–^ BMECs and reported that, compared with EMCN ^+^ BMECs, EMCN ^–^ BMECs presented much greater proliferative potential and were more effective at maintaining HSC numbers and promoting lower rates of myeloid differentiation *in vitro*. These findings suggest that *EMCN* ^+^ BMECs may provide a more supportive niche for HSC maintenance, whereas EMCN ^–^ BMECs may play a role in expanding the endothelial population under certain conditions. Engelhard *et al*. [[35]](#REF35) examined the role of *EMCN* in long-term HSCs and noted that *EMCN* ^–^ long-term HSCs presented increased cell cycle entry and enhanced HSC differentiation under 5-fluorouracil-induced stress and injury. Moreover, these cells presented reduced granulocyte colony-stimulating factor mobilization and decreased HSC migration. These findings suggest that *EMCN* may play a role in the regulation of cell cycle entry, mobilization, and differentiation of HSCs.

Overall, evidence indicates that *EMCN* exerts a complex influence on the regulation of both BMEC and HSC functions, affecting the cell cycle dynamics and capacity of HSCs to maintain homeostatic balance. In the context of platinum-based chemotherapy, *EMCNs* are likely critical in BMECs because they provide the necessary microenvironmental support to HSCs, thereby helping them resist chemotherapy-induced stress. When *EMCN* function is compromised, BMECs may become unable to maintain hematopoietic homeostasis, leading to increased susceptibility to myelosuppression. This intricate regulatory function underscores the importance of *EMCN* in maintaining the balance between HSC quiescence and activation, particularly under the stress of platinum-based chemotherapy. Additionally, our study revealed that *EMCN* may contribute to the susceptibility to myelosuppression induced by platinum-based chemotherapy, potentially through their influence on the capacity of BMECs to support HSCs. This intricate regulatory function underscores the importance of *EMCN* in maintaining the equilibrium between HSC quiescence and activation and highlights its potential as a therapeutic target for enhancing hematopoietic recovery following platinum-based chemotherapy.

On the basis of our gene-based association analysis, another candidate gene associated with platinum-based chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression is *PHLDB2*. Although direct studies of *PHLDB2* in the hematopoietic system are limited, *PHLDB2* has been reported to participate in several key signaling pathways. Kang *et al*. [[36]](#REF36) demonstrated that the Akt-mTOR pathway is downstream of *PHLDB2* and that AKT signaling can regulate cell survival, apoptosis and proliferation. Luo *et al*. [[37]](#REF37) reported that *PHLDB2* can stabilize epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and activate EGFR signaling and that the EGFR signaling pathway is another important pathway that regulates cell growth, proliferation and differentiation. Wang *et al*. [[38]](#REF38) reported that *PHLDB2* can inhibit the MAPK/ERK pathway to alter vasculogenic mimicry formation and that ERK signaling activation promotes cell growth, differentiation or mitosis. In the case of platinum-based chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression, *PHLDB2* may regulate the equilibrium between cell survival, apoptosis and differentiation because of its involvement in relevant signaling pathways. This regulatory function could influence the response of hematopoietic cells to chemotherapeutic stress and thus potentially affect bone marrow recovery. The precise role of *PHLDB2* in this context requires further investigation to determine its specific impact on chemotherapy outcomes.

Our gene set enrichment analyses provided further insight into the genetic basis of platinum-based chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression and identified several gene sets with significant associations that may reveal underlying mechanisms. The “regulation of collateral sprouting” gene set shows the strongest association in the GO dataset (beta = 0.991, *P* = 1.35 × 10 ^–6^). Although this pathway is primarily associated with neuronal axon development [[39]](#REF39), it may imply broader mechanisms related to cellular sprouting and remodeling. This process could be related to the response of bone marrow cells to chemotherapy-induced stress. The “amplified MYC to P27 cell cycle G1/S” gene set is the most significant in the KEGG pathway dataset (beta = 0.865, *P* = 5.86 × 10 ^–4^). This pathway is essential for cell cycle regulation [[40]](#REF40), and variants in this pathway could affect hematopoietic cell proliferation and endure chemotherapy-induced stress. The “signaling by receptor tyrosine kinases” gene set shows the most significant association in the Reactome pathway dataset (beta = 0.673, *P* = 4.74 × 10 ^–4^). Receptor tyrosine kinases initiate numerous cellular signaling pathways by recruiting enzymatic effectors via downstream pathways, including mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), and Janus kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK/STAT). This pathway is essential for cell adhesion, migration, proliferation, and angiogenesis [[41]](#REF41). Variants in this signaling pathway could impact cellular biological function and contribute to the development of myelosuppression.

While our study provides significant insights, it has several limitations. First, the small sample size might restrict the ability to identify more relevant genetic variants. Future research with larger cohorts is necessary to validate our findings and potentially uncover new associations contributing to chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression. Additionally, our study relies on clinical samples and statistical analysis, limiting our understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms. Therefore, further functional studies are needed to elucidate the precise mechanisms by which rs6856089 and associated variants influence EMCN expression and function in the bone marrow microenvironment.

In summary, this study identified genetic variants within the 4q24 locus, particularly the A allele of rs6856089, as being associated with a reduced risk of myelosuppression in NSCLC patients undergoing platinum-based chemotherapy, with *EMCN* involved in this progress. Our findings demonstrate that genetic profiling may facilitate the application of personalized chemotherapy to improve patient outcomes.

## Supporting information

## Supplementary Data

Supplementary data is available at *Acta Biochimica et Biophysica Sinica* online.

## COMPETING INTERESTS

These authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

## Funding Statement

This work was supported by the grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 82173901), the Major Project of the Natural Science Foundation of Hunan Province (Open competition, No. 2021JC0002), and the Hunan Province Key Research and Development Plan of China (No. 2023SK2007).

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Supplementary Materials

### Supplementary Materials

## References

1. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Wagle NS, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2023. CA Cancer J Clin. . 2023;73:17–48. doi: 10.3322/caac.21763.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3322/caac.21763) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3322/caac.21763) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36633525/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=CA%20Cancer%20J%20Clin&title=Cancer%20statistics,%202023&author=RL%20Siegel&author=KD%20Miller&author=NS%20Wagle&author=A%20Jemal&volume=73&publication_year=2023&pages=17-48&pmid=36633525&doi=10.3322/caac.21763&)

2. Zheng M. Classification and pathology of lung cancer. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. . 2016;25:447–468. doi: 10.1016/j.soc.2016.02.003.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soc.2016.02.003) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soc.2016.02.003) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27261908/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Surg%20Oncol%20Clin%20N%20Am&title=Classification%20and%20pathology%20of%20lung%20cancer&author=M%20Zheng&volume=25&publication_year=2016&pages=447-468&pmid=27261908&doi=10.1016/j.soc.2016.02.003&)

3. Ciarimboli G. Anticancer platinum drugs update. Biomolecules. . 2021;11:1637. doi: 10.3390/biom11111637.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom11111637) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom11111637) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8615753/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34827636/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biomolecules&title=Anticancer%20platinum%20drugs%20update&author=G%20Ciarimboli&volume=11&publication_year=2021&pages=1637&pmid=34827636&doi=10.3390/biom11111637&)

4. Oun R, Moussa YE, Wheate NJ. The side effects of platinum-based chemotherapy drugs: a review for chemists. Dalton Trans. . 2018;47:6645–6653. doi: 10.1039/C8DT00838H.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1039/C8DT00838H) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1039/C8DT00838H) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29632935/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Dalton%20Trans&title=The%20side%20effects%20of%20platinum-based%20chemotherapy%20drugs:%20a%20review%20for%20chemists&author=R%20Oun&author=YE%20Moussa&author=NJ%20Wheate&volume=47&publication_year=2018&pages=6645-6653&pmid=29632935&doi=10.1039/C8DT00838H&)

5. Zhang C, Xu C, Gao X, Yao Q. Platinum-based drugs for cancer therapy and anti-tumor strategies. Theranostics. . 2022;12:2115–2132. doi: 10.7150/thno.69424.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.7150/thno.69424) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.7150/thno.69424) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8899578/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35265202/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Theranostics&title=Platinum-based%20drugs%20for%20cancer%20therapy%20and%20anti-tumor%20strategies&author=C%20Zhang&author=C%20Xu&author=X%20Gao&author=Q%20Yao&volume=12&publication_year=2022&pages=2115-2132&pmid=35265202&doi=10.7150/thno.69424&)

6. Repetto L. Incidence and clinical impact of chemotherapy induced myelotoxicity in cancer patients: an observational retrospective survey. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. . 2009;72:170–179. doi: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2009.03.004.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.critrevonc.2009.03.004) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.critrevonc.2009.03.004) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19406660/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Crit%20Rev%20Oncol%20Hematol&title=Incidence%20and%20clinical%20impact%20of%20chemotherapy%20induced%20myelotoxicity%20in%20cancer%20patients:%20an%20observational%20retrospective%20survey&author=L%20Repetto&volume=72&publication_year=2009&pages=170-179&pmid=19406660&doi=10.1016/j.critrevonc.2009.03.004&)

7. Cheng B, Ding K, Chen P, Ji J, Luo T, Guo X, Qiu W, et al. Anti-PD-L1/TGF-βR fusion protein (SHR-1701) overcomes disrupted lymphocyte recovery-induced resistance to PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors in lung cancer. Cancer Commun. . 2022;42:17–36. doi: 10.1002/cac2.12244.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/cac2.12244) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/cac2.12244) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8753312/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34981670/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Commun&title=Anti-PD-L1/TGF-%CE%B2R%20fusion%20protein%20(SHR-1701)%20overcomes%20disrupted%20lymphocyte%20recovery-induced%20resistance%20to%20PD-1/PD-L1%20inhibitors%20in%20lung%20cancer&author=B%20Cheng&author=K%20Ding&author=P%20Chen&author=J%20Ji&author=T%20Luo&volume=42&publication_year=2022&pages=17-36&pmid=34981670&doi=10.1002/cac2.12244&)

8. Welsh M, Mangravite L, Medina MW, Tantisira K, Zhang W, Huang RS, McLeod H, et al. Pharmacogenomic discovery using cell-based models. Pharmacol Rev. . 2009;61:413–429. doi: 10.1124/pr.109.001461.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1124/pr.109.001461) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1124/pr.109.001461) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2802425/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20038569/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacol%20Rev&title=Pharmacogenomic%20discovery%20using%20cell-based%20models&author=M%20Welsh&author=L%20Mangravite&author=MW%20Medina&author=K%20Tantisira&author=W%20Zhang&volume=61&publication_year=2009&pages=413-429&pmid=20038569&doi=10.1124/pr.109.001461&)

9. Zhou ZW, Chen XW, Sneed KB, Yang YX, Zhang X, He ZX, Chow K, et al. Clinical association between pharmacogenomics and adverse drug reactions. Drugs. . 2015;75:589–631. doi: 10.1007/s40265-015-0375-0.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40265-015-0375-0) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40265-015-0375-0) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25895462/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Drugs&title=Clinical%20association%20between%20pharmacogenomics%20and%20adverse%20drug%20reactions&author=ZW%20Zhou&author=XW%20Chen&author=KB%20Sneed&author=YX%20Yang&author=X%20Zhang&volume=75&publication_year=2015&pages=589-631&pmid=25895462&doi=10.1007/s40265-015-0375-0&)

10. Bertholee D, Maring JG, van Kuilenburg ABP. Genotypes affecting the pharmacokinetics of anticancer drugs. Clin Pharmacokinet. . 2017;56:317–337. doi: 10.1007/s40262-016-0450-z.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40262-016-0450-z) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40262-016-0450-z) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5340837/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27641154/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Pharmacokinet&title=Genotypes%20affecting%20the%20pharmacokinetics%20of%20anticancer%20drugs&author=D%20Bertholee&author=JG%20Maring&author=ABP%20van%20Kuilenburg&volume=56&publication_year=2017&pages=317-337&pmid=27641154&doi=10.1007/s40262-016-0450-z&)

11. Zhang G, Nebert DW. Personalized medicine: Genetic risk prediction of drug response. Pharmacol Ther. . 2017;175:75–90. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2017.02.036.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2017.02.036) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2017.02.036) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5653378/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28213088/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacol%20Ther&title=Personalized%20medicine:%20Genetic%20risk%20prediction%20of%20drug%20response&author=G%20Zhang&author=DW%20Nebert&volume=175&publication_year=2017&pages=75-90&pmid=28213088&doi=10.1016/j.pharmthera.2017.02.036&)

12. Zheng NS, Stone CA, Jiang L, Shaffer CM, Kerchberger VE, Chung CP, Feng QP, et al. High-throughput framework for genetic analyses of adverse drug reactions using electronic health records. PLoS Genet. . 2021;17:e1009593. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009593.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1009593) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1009593) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8195357/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34061827/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Genet&title=High-throughput%20framework%20for%20genetic%20analyses%20of%20adverse%20drug%20reactions%20using%20electronic%20health%20records&author=NS%20Zheng&author=CA%20Stone&author=L%20Jiang&author=CM%20Shaffer&author=VE%20Kerchberger&volume=17&publication_year=2021&pages=e1009593&pmid=34061827&doi=10.1371/journal.pgen.1009593&)

13. Tsermpini EE, Al-Mahayri ZN, Ali BR, Patrinos GP. Clinical implementation of drug metabolizing gene-based therapeutic interventions worldwide. Hum Genet. . 2022;141:1137–1157. doi: 10.1007/s00439-021-02369-x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-021-02369-x) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-021-02369-x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34599365/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hum%20Genet&title=Clinical%20implementation%20of%20drug%20metabolizing%20gene-based%20therapeutic%20interventions%20worldwide&author=EE%20Tsermpini&author=ZN%20Al-Mahayri&author=BR%20Ali&author=GP%20Patrinos&volume=141&publication_year=2022&pages=1137-1157&pmid=34599365&doi=10.1007/s00439-021-02369-x&)

14. Mao C, Chen J, Zou T, Zhou Y, Liu J, Li X, Li X, et al. Genome-wide analysis identify novel germline genetic variations in ADCY1 influencing platinum-based chemotherapy response in non-small cell lung cancer. Acta Pharm Sin B. . 2022;12:1514–1522. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2021.10.007.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2021.10.007) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2021.10.007) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC9069400/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35530157/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Acta%20Pharm%20Sin%20B&title=Genome-wide%20analysis%20identify%20novel%20germline%20genetic%20variations%20in%20ADCY1%20influencing%20platinum-based%20chemotherapy%20response%20in%20non-small%20cell%20lung%20cancer&author=C%20Mao&author=J%20Chen&author=T%20Zou&author=Y%20Zhou&author=J%20Liu&volume=12&publication_year=2022&pages=1514-1522&pmid=35530157&doi=10.1016/j.apsb.2021.10.007&)

15. Yu LL, Hu BW, Huang HX, Yu B, Xiao Q, Lv QL, Luo CH, et al. A two-stage genome-wide association study identifies novel germline genetic variations in CACNA2D3 associated with radiotherapy response in nasopharyngeal carcinoma. J Transl Med. . 2023;21:11. doi: 10.1186/s12967-022-03819-4.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-022-03819-4) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-022-03819-4) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC9830790/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36624463/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Transl%20Med&title=A%20two-stage%20genome-wide%20association%20study%20identifies%20novel%20germline%20genetic%20variations%20in%20CACNA2D3%20associated%20with%20radiotherapy%20response%20in%20nasopharyngeal%20carcinoma&author=LL%20Yu&author=BW%20Hu&author=HX%20Huang&author=B%20Yu&author=Q%20Xiao&volume=21&publication_year=2023&pages=11&pmid=36624463&doi=10.1186/s12967-022-03819-4&)

16. Wang Y, Xiao F, Zhao Y, Mao CX, Yu LL, Wang LY, Xiao Q, et al. A two-stage genome-wide association study to identify novel genetic loci associated with acute radiotherapy toxicity in nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Mol Cancer. . 2022;21:169. doi: 10.1186/s12943-022-01631-8.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12943-022-01631-8) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12943-022-01631-8) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC9400233/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35999636/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Cancer&title=A%20two-stage%20genome-wide%20association%20study%20to%20identify%20novel%20genetic%20loci%20associated%20with%20acute%20radiotherapy%20toxicity%20in%20nasopharyngeal%20carcinoma&author=Y%20Wang&author=F%20Xiao&author=Y%20Zhao&author=CX%20Mao&author=LL%20Yu&volume=21&publication_year=2022&pages=169&pmid=35999636&doi=10.1186/s12943-022-01631-8&)

17. Xiao Q, Mao C, Gao Y, Huang H, Yu B, Yu L, Li X, et al. Establishing a prediction model for the efficacy of platinum-based chemotherapy in NSCLC based on a two cohorts GWAS study. J Clin Med. . 2023;12:1318. doi: 10.3390/jcm12041318.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12041318) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12041318) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC9958581/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36835855/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Med&title=Establishing%20a%20prediction%20model%20for%20the%20efficacy%20of%20platinum-based%20chemotherapy%20in%20NSCLC%20based%20on%20a%20two%20cohorts%20GWAS%20study&author=Q%20Xiao&author=C%20Mao&author=Y%20Gao&author=H%20Huang&author=B%20Yu&volume=12&publication_year=2023&pages=1318&pmid=36835855&doi=10.3390/jcm12041318&)

18. Chang CC, Chow CC, Tellier LC, Vattikuti S, Purcell SM, Lee JJ. Second-generation PLINK: Rising to the challenge of larger and richer datasets. Gigascience. . 2015;4:7. doi: 10.1186/s13742-015-0047-8.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13742-015-0047-8) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13742-015-0047-8) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4342193/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25722852/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gigascience&title=Second-generation%20PLINK:%20Rising%20to%20the%20challenge%20of%20larger%20and%20richer%20datasets&author=CC%20Chang&author=CC%20Chow&author=LC%20Tellier&author=S%20Vattikuti&author=SM%20Purcell&volume=4&publication_year=2015&pages=7&pmid=25722852&doi=10.1186/s13742-015-0047-8&)

19. Delaneau O, Marchini J, Zagury JF. A linear complexity phasing method for thousands of genomes. Nat Methods. . 2011;9:179–181. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.1785.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1785) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1785) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22138821/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Methods&title=A%20linear%20complexity%20phasing%20method%20for%20thousands%20of%20genomes&author=O%20Delaneau&author=J%20Marchini&author=JF%20Zagury&volume=9&publication_year=2011&pages=179-181&pmid=22138821&doi=10.1038/nmeth.1785&)

20. Howie BN, Donnelly P, Marchini J, Schork NJ. A flexible and accurate genotype imputation method for the next generation of genome-wide association studies. PLoS Genet. . 2009;5:e1000529. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000529.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000529) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000529) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2689936/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19543373/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Genet&title=A%20flexible%20and%20accurate%20genotype%20imputation%20method%20for%20the%20next%20generation%20of%20genome-wide%20association%20studies&author=BN%20Howie&author=P%20Donnelly&author=J%20Marchini&author=NJ%20Schork&volume=5&publication_year=2009&pages=e1000529&pmid=19543373&doi=10.1371/journal.pgen.1000529&)

21. Dong SS, He WM, Ji JJ, Zhang C, Guo Y, Yang TL. LDBlockShow: a fast and convenient tool for visualizing linkage disequilibrium and haplotype blocks based on variant call format files. Brief BioInf. . 2021;22:bbaa227. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbaa227.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbaa227) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbaa227) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33126247/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Brief%20BioInf&title=LDBlockShow:%20a%20fast%20and%20convenient%20tool%20for%20visualizing%20linkage%20disequilibrium%20and%20haplotype%20blocks%20based%20on%20variant%20call%20format%20files&author=SS%20Dong&author=WM%20He&author=JJ%20Ji&author=C%20Zhang&author=Y%20Guo&volume=22&publication_year=2021&pages=bbaa227&pmid=33126247&doi=10.1093/bib/bbaa227&)

22. Pruim RJ, Welch RP, Sanna S, Teslovich TM, Chines PS, Gliedt TP, Boehnke M, et al. LocusZoom: regional visualization of genome-wide association scan results. Bioinformatics. . 2010;26:2336–2337. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq419.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btq419) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btq419) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2935401/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20634204/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=LocusZoom:%20regional%20visualization%20of%20genome-wide%20association%20scan%20results&author=RJ%20Pruim&author=RP%20Welch&author=S%20Sanna&author=TM%20Teslovich&author=PS%20Chines&volume=26&publication_year=2010&pages=2336-2337&pmid=20634204&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btq419&)

23. de Leeuw CA, Mooij JM, Heskes T, Posthuma D, Tang H. MAGMA: generalized gene-set analysis of GWAS data. PLoS Comput Biol. . 2015;11:e1004219. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004219.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004219) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004219) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4401657/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25885710/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Comput%20Biol&title=MAGMA:%20generalized%20gene-set%20analysis%20of%20GWAS%20data&author=CA%20de%20Leeuw&author=JM%20Mooij&author=T%20Heskes&author=D%20Posthuma&author=H%20Tang&volume=11&publication_year=2015&pages=e1004219&pmid=25885710&doi=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004219&)

24. Watanabe K, Taskesen E, van Bochoven A, Posthuma D. Functional mapping and annotation of genetic associations with FUMA. Nat Commun. . 2017;8:1826. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-01261-5.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-01261-5) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-01261-5) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5705698/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29184056/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Commun&title=Functional%20mapping%20and%20annotation%20of%20genetic%20associations%20with%20FUMA&author=K%20Watanabe&author=E%20Taskesen&author=A%20van%20Bochoven&author=D%20Posthuma&volume=8&publication_year=2017&pages=1826&pmid=29184056&doi=10.1038/s41467-017-01261-5&)

25. Cao S, Wang S, Ma H, Tang S, Sun C, Dai J, Wang C, et al. Genome-wide association study of myelosuppression in non-small-cell lung cancer patients with platinum-based chemotherapy. Pharmacogenomics J. . 2016;16:41–46. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2015.22.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/tpj.2015.22) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/tpj.2015.22) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25823687/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics%20J&title=Genome-wide%20association%20study%20of%20myelosuppression%20in%20non-small-cell%20lung%20cancer%20patients%20with%20platinum-based%20chemotherapy&author=S%20Cao&author=S%20Wang&author=H%20Ma&author=S%20Tang&author=C%20Sun&volume=16&publication_year=2016&pages=41-46&pmid=25823687&doi=10.1038/tpj.2015.22&)

26. Chu T, Li R, Shao M, Ye J, Han B. RAD18 polymorphisms are associated with platinum-based chemotherapy toxicity in Chinese patients with non-small cell lung cancer. Acta Pharmacol Sin. . 2016;37:1490–1498. doi: 10.1038/aps.2016.100.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/aps.2016.100) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/aps.2016.100) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5099406/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27665847/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Acta%20Pharmacol%20Sin&title=RAD18%20polymorphisms%20are%20associated%20with%20platinum-based%20chemotherapy%20toxicity%20in%20Chinese%20patients%20with%20non-small%20cell%20lung%20cancer&author=T%20Chu&author=R%20Li&author=M%20Shao&author=J%20Ye&author=B%20Han&volume=37&publication_year=2016&pages=1490-1498&pmid=27665847&doi=10.1038/aps.2016.100&)

27. Liu W, Wang Y, Luo J, Yuan H, Luo Z. Genetic polymorphisms and platinum-based chemotherapy-induced toxicities in patients with lung cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Front Oncol. . 2019;9:1573. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2019.01573.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2019.01573) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2019.01573) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7090160/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32257953/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front%20Oncol&title=Genetic%20polymorphisms%20and%20platinum-based%20chemotherapy-induced%20toxicities%20in%20patients%20with%20lung%20cancer:%20a%20systematic%20review%20and%20meta-analysis&author=W%20Liu&author=Y%20Wang&author=J%20Luo&author=H%20Yuan&author=Z%20Luo&volume=9&publication_year=2019&pages=1573&pmid=32257953&doi=10.3389/fonc.2019.01573&)

28. Jassem J, Krzakowski M, Roszkowski K, Ramlau R, Marek Słomiński J, Szczęsna A, Krawczyk K, et al. A phase II study of gemcitabine plus cisplatin in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer: Clinical outcomes and quality of life. Lung Cancer. . 2002;35:73–79. doi: 10.1016/S0169-5002(01)00286-0.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0169-5002(01)00286-0) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0169-5002(01)00286-0) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11750716/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Lung%20Cancer&title=A%20phase%20II%20study%20of%20gemcitabine%20plus%20cisplatin%20in%20patients%20with%20advanced%20non-small%20cell%20lung%20cancer:%20Clinical%20outcomes%20and%20quality%20of%20life&author=J%20Jassem&author=M%20Krzakowski&author=K%20Roszkowski&author=R%20Ramlau&author=J%20Marek%20S%C5%82omi%C5%84ski&volume=35&publication_year=2002&pages=73-79&pmid=11750716&doi=10.1016/S0169-5002(01)00286-0&)

29. Movsas B, Langer CJ, Ross HJ, Wang L, Jotte RM, Feigenberg S, Xu F, et al. Randomized phase II trial of cisplatin, etoposide, and radiation followed by gemcitabine alone or by combined gemcitabine and docetaxel in stage iii a/b unresectable non-small cell lung cancer. J Thoracic Oncol. . 2010;5:673–679. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3181d60e8f.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/JTO.0b013e3181d60e8f) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/JTO.0b013e3181d60e8f) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20354453/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Thoracic%20Oncol&title=Randomized%20phase%20II%20trial%20of%20cisplatin,%20etoposide,%20and%20radiation%20followed%20by%20gemcitabine%20alone%20or%20by%20combined%20gemcitabine%20and%20docetaxel%20in%20stage%20iii%20a/b%20unresectable%20non-small%20cell%20lung%20cancer&author=B%20Movsas&author=CJ%20Langer&author=HJ%20Ross&author=L%20Wang&author=RM%20Jotte&volume=5&publication_year=2010&pages=673-679&pmid=20354453&doi=10.1097/JTO.0b013e3181d60e8f&)

30. Pfisterer J, Plante M, Vergote I, du Bois A, Hirte H, Lacave AJ, Wagner U, et al. Gemcitabine plus carboplatin compared with carboplatin in patients with platinum-sensitive recurrent ovarian cancer: an intergroup trial of the AGO-OVAR, the NCIC CTG, and the EORTC GCG. J Clin Oncol. . 2006;24:4699–4707. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2006.06.0913.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2006.06.0913) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2006.06.0913) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16966687/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Gemcitabine%20plus%20carboplatin%20compared%20with%20carboplatin%20in%20patients%20with%20platinum-sensitive%20recurrent%20ovarian%20cancer:%20an%20intergroup%20trial%20of%20the%20AGO-OVAR,%20the%20NCIC%20CTG,%20and%20the%20EORTC%20GCG&author=J%20Pfisterer&author=M%20Plante&author=I%20Vergote&author=A%20du%20Bois&author=H%20Hirte&volume=24&publication_year=2006&pages=4699-4707&pmid=16966687&doi=10.1200/JCO.2006.06.0913&)

31. Liu C, Shao ZM, Zhang L, Beatty P, Sartippour M, Lane T, Livingston E, et al. Human endomucin is an endothelial marker. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. . 2001;288:129–136. doi: 10.1006/bbrc.2001.5737.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2001.5737) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2001.5737) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11594763/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biochem%20Biophys%20Res%20Commun&title=Human%20endomucin%20is%20an%20endothelial%20marker&author=C%20Liu&author=ZM%20Shao&author=L%20Zhang&author=P%20Beatty&author=M%20Sartippour&volume=288&publication_year=2001&pages=129-136&pmid=11594763&doi=10.1006/bbrc.2001.5737&)

32. Matsubara A, Iwama A, Yamazaki S, Furuta C, Hirasawa R, Morita Y, Osawa M, et al. Endomucin, a CD34-like sialomucin, marks hematopoietic stem cells throughout development. J Exp Med. . 2005;202:1483–1492. doi: 10.1084/jem.20051325.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20051325) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20051325) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2213340/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16314436/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Exp%20Med&title=Endomucin,%20a%20CD34-like%20sialomucin,%20marks%20hematopoietic%20stem%20cells%20throughout%20development&author=A%20Matsubara&author=A%20Iwama&author=S%20Yamazaki&author=C%20Furuta&author=R%20Hirasawa&volume=202&publication_year=2005&pages=1483-1492&pmid=16314436&doi=10.1084/jem.20051325&)

33. Kumar R, Godavarthy PS, Krause DS. The bone marrow microenvironment in health and disease at a glance. J Cell Sci. . 2018;131:jcs201707. doi: 10.1242/jcs.201707.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.201707) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.201707) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29472498/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Cell%20Sci&title=The%20bone%20marrow%20microenvironment%20in%20health%20and%20disease%20at%20a%20glance&author=R%20Kumar&author=PS%20Godavarthy&author=DS%20Krause&volume=131&publication_year=2018&pages=jcs201707&pmid=29472498&doi=10.1242/jcs.201707&)

34. Kim YW, Zara G, Kang HJ, Branciamore S, O′Meally D, Feng Y, Kuan CY, et al. Integration of single-cell transcriptomes and biological function reveals distinct behavioral patterns in bone marrow endothelium. Nat Commun. . 2022;13:7235. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-34425-z.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34425-z) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34425-z) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC9700769/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36433940/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Commun&title=Integration%20of%20single-cell%20transcriptomes%20and%20biological%20function%20reveals%20distinct%20behavioral%20patterns%20in%20bone%20marrow%20endothelium&author=YW%20Kim&author=G%20Zara&author=HJ%20Kang&author=S%20Branciamore&author=D%20O%E2%80%B2Meally&volume=13&publication_year=2022&pages=7235&pmid=36433940&doi=10.1038/s41467-022-34425-z&)

35. Engelhard S, Estruch M, Qin S, Engelhard CA, Rodriguez-Gonzalez FG, Drilsvik M, Martin-Gonzalez J, et al. Endomucin marks quiescent long-term multi-lineage repopulating hematopoietic stem cells and is essential for their transendothelial migration. Cell Rep. . 2024;43:114475. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114475.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114475) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114475) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38996072/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Rep&title=Endomucin%20marks%20quiescent%20long-term%20multi-lineage%20repopulating%20hematopoietic%20stem%20cells%20and%20is%20essential%20for%20their%20transendothelial%20migration&author=S%20Engelhard&author=M%20Estruch&author=S%20Qin&author=CA%20Engelhard&author=FG%20Rodriguez-Gonzalez&volume=43&publication_year=2024&pages=114475&pmid=38996072&doi=10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114475&)

36. Kang W, Zhang J, Huang T, Zhou Y, Wong CC, Chan RCK, Dong Y, et al. NOTCH3, a crucial target of miR-491-5p/miR-875-5p, promotes gastric carcinogenesis by upregulating PHLDB2 expression and activating Akt pathway. Oncogene. . 2021;40:1578–1594. doi: 10.1038/s41388-020-01579-3.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41388-020-01579-3) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41388-020-01579-3) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7932926/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33452458/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Oncogene&title=NOTCH3,%20a%20crucial%20target%20of%20miR-491-5p/miR-875-5p,%20promotes%20gastric%20carcinogenesis%20by%20upregulating%20PHLDB2%20expression%20and%20activating%20Akt%20pathway&author=W%20Kang&author=J%20Zhang&author=T%20Huang&author=Y%20Zhou&author=CC%20Wong&volume=40&publication_year=2021&pages=1578-1594&pmid=33452458&doi=10.1038/s41388-020-01579-3&)

37. Luo M, Huang Z, Yang X, Chen Y, Jiang J, Zhang L, Zhou L, et al. PHLDB2 mediates cetuximab resistance via interacting with EGFR in latent metastasis of colorectal cancer. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. . 2022;13:1223–1242. doi: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2021.12.011.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcmgh.2021.12.011) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcmgh.2021.12.011) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8881668/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34952201/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Mol%20Gastroenterol%20Hepatol&title=PHLDB2%20mediates%20cetuximab%20resistance%20via%20interacting%20with%20EGFR%20in%20latent%20metastasis%20of%20colorectal%20cancer&author=M%20Luo&author=Z%20Huang&author=X%20Yang&author=Y%20Chen&author=J%20Jiang&volume=13&publication_year=2022&pages=1223-1242&pmid=34952201&doi=10.1016/j.jcmgh.2021.12.011&)

38. Wang H, Wang L, Zheng Q, Lu Z, Chen Y, Shen D, Xue D, et al. OncometaboliteL-2-hydroxyglurate directly induces vasculogenic mimicry throughPHLDB2 in renal cell carcinoma. Intl J Cancer. . 2021;148:1743–1755. doi: 10.1002/ijc.33435.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.33435) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.33435) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7986127/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33320958/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Intl%20J%20Cancer&title=OncometaboliteL-2-hydroxyglurate%20directly%20induces%20vasculogenic%20mimicry%20throughPHLDB2%20in%20renal%20cell%20carcinoma&author=H%20Wang&author=L%20Wang&author=Q%20Zheng&author=Z%20Lu&author=Y%20Chen&volume=148&publication_year=2021&pages=1743-1755&pmid=33320958&doi=10.1002/ijc.33435&)

39. Bareyre FM, Garzorz N, Lang C, Misgeld T, Büning H, Kerschensteiner M. In vivo imaging reveals a phase-specific role of STAT3 during central and peripheral nervous system axon regeneration. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. . 2011;108:6282–6287. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1015239108.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1015239108) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1015239108) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3076857/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21447717/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&title=In%20vivo%20imaging%20reveals%20a%20phase-specific%20role%20of%20STAT3%20during%20central%20and%20peripheral%20nervous%20system%20axon%20regeneration&author=FM%20Bareyre&author=N%20Garzorz&author=C%20Lang&author=T%20Misgeld&author=H%20B%C3%BCning&volume=108&publication_year=2011&pages=6282-6287&pmid=21447717&doi=10.1073/pnas.1015239108&)

40. Pierelli L, Marone M, Bonanno G, Mozzetti S, Rutella S, Morosetti R, Rumi C, et al. Modulation of bcl-2 and p27 in human primitive proliferating hematopoietic progenitors by autocrine TGF-β1 is a cell cycle–independent effect and influences their hematopoietic potential. Blood. . 2000;95:3001–3009. doi: 10.1182/blood.V95.10.3001.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.V95.10.3001) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.V95.10.3001) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10807762/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Blood&title=Modulation%20of%20bcl-2%20and%20p27%20in%20human%20primitive%20proliferating%20hematopoietic%20progenitors%20by%20autocrine%20TGF-%CE%B21%20is%20a%20cell%20cycle%E2%80%93independent%20effect%20and%20influences%20their%20hematopoietic%20potential&author=L%20Pierelli&author=M%20Marone&author=G%20Bonanno&author=S%20Mozzetti&author=S%20Rutella&volume=95&publication_year=2000&pages=3001-3009&pmid=10807762&doi=10.1182/blood.V95.10.3001&)

41. Segaliny AI, Tellez-Gabriel M, Heymann MF, Heymann D. Receptor tyrosine kinases: characterisation, mechanism of action and therapeutic interests for bone cancers. J Bone Oncol. 2015, 4: 1–12 .  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbo.2015.01.001) | [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbo.2015.01.001) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4620971/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26579483/)
