# HLA-B*53:01 is a significant risk factor for liver injury due to phenytoin and other anti-epileptic drugs in African Americans

## Metadata
**Authors:** Paola Nicoletti, Andrew Dellinger, Yi-Ju Li, Huiman Barnhart, Elizabeth Phillips, Naga Chalasani
**Journal:** The American journal of gastroenterology
**Date:** 2023 Aug 8
**DOI:** [10.14309/ajg.0000000000002454](https://doi.org/10.14309/ajg.0000000000002454)
**PMID:** 37552102
**PMCID:** PMC10841235
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10841235/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10841235/pdf/nihms-1922272.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10841235/pdf/nihms-1922272.pdf)

## Abstract

**Objective:** 
To investigate HLA alleles associated with anti-epileptics (AEDs) liver injury in African Americans (AA).

**Methods:** 
21 AA with AED DILI, 176 AA with DILI due to non-AEDs, and 5816 AA population controls were included.

**Results:** 
HLA-B*53:01 was significantly associated with aromatic AED-DILI (OR: 4.52, 95% CI: 2.42-8.44, P = 1.46x10−5). Phenytoin DILI showed the strongest association with HLA-B*53:01 (OR: 9.17; 95% CI: 3.61 - 23.28, P = 1.1x10−5). The HLA-B*53:01 allele was carried by 8 out of 9 AA phenytoin-DILI cases.

**Conclusion:** 
HLA-B*53:01 is a significant risk factor for liver injury due to anti-epileptics, particularly phenytoin, in African Americans.

Keywords: DILI, HLA, HLA-B*53:01, DRESS

### Objective:

To investigate HLA alleles associated with anti-epileptics (AEDs) liver injury in African Americans (AA).

### Methods:

21 AA with AED DILI, 176 AA with DILI due to non-AEDs, and 5816 AA population controls were included.

### Results:

*HLA-B*53:01* was significantly associated with aromatic AED-DILI (OR: 4.52, 95% CI: 2.42-8.44, P = 1.46x10^−5^). Phenytoin DILI showed the strongest association with *HLA-B*53:01* (OR: 9.17; 95% CI: 3.61 - 23.28, P = 1.1x10^−5^). The *HLA-B*53:01* allele was carried by 8 out of 9 AA phenytoin-DILI cases.

### Conclusion:

*HLA-B*53:01* is a significant risk factor for liver injury due to anti-epileptics, particularly phenytoin, in African Americans.

## Introduction

Anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs) are an important cause for idiosyncratic drug induced liver injury (DILI) in African Americans (AA). Phenytoin is the third most common cause for DILI in African Americans, behind trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ) and isoniazid.^1^ AEDs, including phenytoin and carbamazepine can cause severe cutaneous adverse drug reactions and drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS), which are strongly associated with *HLA-B*15:02* and *HLA-A*31:01* in European and Asian populations.^2^ Recent studies identified HLA alleles as risk factors for DILI due to agents such as allopurinol, TMP-SMZ and green tea extract.^3,4,5^ As HLA risk alleles for AED-DILI have not yet been identified, we investigated their role among AA in whom there is heightened burden of AED-DILI.

## Methods

We analyzed 21 AA patients with AED-DILI and 176 AA patients with non-AED prescription DILI (DILI controls) enrolled into DILIN studies. DILI cases with definite, highly likely, or probable causality were included. ^3, 4, 6^ DRESS was assessed in AED-DILI cases by RegiSCAR scoring system as previously described.^7^ Given the low DILI incidence rate in the general population, we constructed an AA control group (N = 5816) from the PAGE BioME biobank cohort (phs000925.v1.p1). HLA class I and II alleles were determined by direct sequencing (Illumina MiSeq) in DILI cases and were imputed from genotype data in controls as previously described.^4^

Genetic ancestry was inferred by EIGENSTRAT as previously described.^4^ A case/control association test was conducted for each allele using a Fisher Exact test or Firth logistic regression (≥ 40 cases) adjusting for population structure using PC 1 and 2. ^4, 6^ The false discovery rate (FDR) was computed to correct for multiple testing.^4^ Alleles with qvalue < 0.10 were considered as significant. See [supplementary material](#SD1) for additional information on methods.

## Results

Selected characteristics of 21 AA with AED DILI and 176 AA DILI controls are shown in [Table S1](#SD1). Of 21 AA with AED-DILI, 17 were due to aromatic AEDs (phenytoin 9, carbamazepine 3, lamotrigine 4, and ethosuximide 1) and 4 were due to non-aromatic AEDs (topiramate 2, valproate 1, and pregabalin 1).

*HLA-B*53:01* was significantly associated with AED-DILI (OR: 4.52, 95% CI: 2.42-8.44, P = 1.4x10^−5^, FDR = 0.001). *HLA-B*53:01* allele frequency was 3 times higher in AED-DILI cases than in controls (0.38 vs 0.12). Phenytoin DILI showed the strongest association with *HLA-B*53:01* (OR: 9.17; 95% CI: 3.61 - 23.28, P = 1.1x10^−5^, FDR = 0.0006, [Table 1](#T1)). The *HLA-B*53:01* allele was carried by 8 out of 9 African Americans with phenytoin DILI (22% were homozygous). All *HLA-B*53:01* carriers with phenytoin DILI developed DRESS and 87% had the *HLA-B*53:01*/*HLA-C*04:01* haplotype (P = 4.0x10^−5^). *HLA-B*53:01* was not carried by any of 11 European American patients with phenytoin-DILI. A second allele, *HLA-A*03:01* was also independently associated with phenytoin-DILI (OR = 9.31; 95% CI: 3.12-26.73, P = 0.0002, [Table S2](#SD1)).

### Table 1.

| Drug | Allele | OR (95%CI) | P | FDR | AF cases | AF controls | CF cases | % Carriers with DRESS |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Phenytoin (N=9) | B*53:01 | 9.17 (3.61-23.28) | 1.1x10−5 | 0.0006 | 0.56 | 0.12 | 0.89 | 100% |
| A*03:01 | 6.12 (2.29-16.34) | 0.002 | 0.04 | 0.33 | 0.08 | 0.44 | 100% |  |
| Lamotrigine (N=4) | A*32:01 | 26.97 (5.40-134.8) | 0.004 | 0.07 | 0.25 | 0.01 | 0.50 | 100% |
| All AEDs (N = 21) | B*53:01 | 4.52 (2.42-8.44) | 1.46x10−5 | 0.001 | 0.38 | 0.12 | 0.57 | 75% |
| A*32:01 | 6.22 (1.90-20.38) | 0.01 | 0.28 | 0.07 | 0.01 | 0.14 | 67% |  |
| Aromatic AED (N =17) | B*53:01 | 4.54 (2.27-9.09) | 8.7x10−5 | 0.006 | 0.38 | 0.12 | 0.59 | 90% |
| A*32:01 | 7.83 (2.37-25.91) | 0.009 | 0.14 | 0.09 | 0.01 | 0.18 | 67% |  |

Table 1 Caption: Association of AED-DILI with HLA alleles across drug classes in African American DILI patients

*HLA-B*53:01* was also carried by AA patients with DILI due to carbamazepine, pregabalin, topiramate and lamotrigine, suggesting that *HLA-B*53:01* could be a shared genetic risk variant across different AED drugs for liver injury among AA. *HLA-B*53:01* allele frequencies for phenytoin DILI, non-phenytoin AED DILI, and AA population controls were 0.56 (Carriage rare [CR] 0.89), 0.25 (CR 0.33), and 0.12 (CR 0.22), respectively. 67% of *HLA-B*53:01* carriers with AED DILI developed DRESS and 62% had the *HLA-B*53:01*/*HLA-C*04:01* haplotype (P = 3.0x10^−4^). *HLA-B*53:01* carriers were older and had more severe DILI than non-carriers ([Table S3](#SD1)).

Interestingly, *HLA-B*53:01* was significantly associated with DILI due to any causal agent in the entire cohort of 197 African American patients with DILI due to prescription agents (OR: 1.66, 95% CI: 1.3, 2.15, P = 0.0003, [Table 2](#T2)). Among 176 African Americans with non-AED DILI, *HLA-B*53:*01 allele frequency was significantly higher compared to controls (AF = 0.16 vs 0.12, OR: 1.4, 95% CI: 1.04, 1.87, P = 0.03). In this group, *HLA-B*53:01* was enriched in allopurinol (independently from *HLA-B*58:01*) isoniazid, and TMP-SMZ DILI cases.

### Table 2.

| Drug group | n | Case AF¶ | OR (95% CI) | P |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| All DILI | 197 | 0.18 | 1.66 (1.27,2.15) | 0.0003* |
| Non-AED-DILI | 176 | 0.16 | 1.40 (1.04,1.87) | 0.03 |
| Non-AED, non-allopurinol DILI | 169 | 0.15 | 1.32 (0.96,1.77) | 0.09 |
| Non-phenytoin, non-allopurinol DILI | 181 | 0.15 | 1.39 (1.03,1.84) | 0.03 |
| Phenytoin DILI | 9 | 0.56 | 9.17 (3.61-23.28) | 1.1x10−5** |
| Allopurinol DILI | 7 | 0.36 | 4.08 (1.36,12.18) | 0.02 |
| Isoniazid DILI | 21 | 0.24 | 2.29 (1.13,4.68) | 0.03 |
| TMP-SMZ DILI | 14 | 0.18 | 1.60 (0.61,4.20) | 0.37 |
| Methyldopa DILI | 7 | 0.21 | 2.00 (0.56,7.18) | 0.23 |

Table 2 Caption: Association of HLA-B*53:01 with DILI across multiple drug groups in African American patients

Among the 17 AA with DILI due to aromatic-AEDs, *HLA-B*53:01* was still the most significant associated allele ([Table 1](#T1)), with 90% of the carriers developing DRESS. African Americans with DILI due to aromatic-AEDs also showed a higher frequency of *HLA-A*32:01* compared to controls (0.09 vs 0.01; P = 0.009). *HLA-A*32:01* was strongly associated with lamotrigine DILI in African Americans (0.25 vs 0.01; P = 0.004, FDR = 0.07 [Table 1](#T1)). For comparison, *HLA-A*32:01* showed a higher frequency in 9 European Americans (0.17 vs 0.03, P = 0.02) and in 2 Hispanic lamotrigine DILI patients (0.50 vs 0.04, P = 0.008) in DILIN studies than in population controls.

The performance of *HLA-B*53:01* for predicting liver injury from phenytoin or any AED, and *HLA-A*32:01* for predicting liver injury from lamotrigine among AA are shown in [Table S4](#SD1). They showed very high specificity and NPV albeit low sensitivity and PPV. *HLA B*53:01* showed excellent sensitivity (89%), specificity (100%), and NPV (100%) but a PPV of only 0.006 for predicting phenytoin DILI.

## Discussion

Our results suggest *HLA-B*53:01* as a significant risk factor for liver injury due to phenytoin and other AEDs in AA. *HLA-B*53:01* has previously been associated with raltegravir-induced DRESS in AA and Hispanic patients with HIV.^8^ AA with allopurinol DILI were also enriched for the allele, and 75% of carriers developed DRESS.^3^ Similarly, the majority of AA patients with AED-DILI with *HLA B*53:01* developed DRESS. Interestingly, DILI due to TMP-SMZ,^4^ and possibly allopurinol^3^, is also associated with *HLA-B*35:01* among AA. *HLA-B*53:01* and *HLA-B*35:01* differ in a few amino acids showing analogous binding site affinities;^8^ consequently they may elicit a similar T-mediated hypersensitivity. Our study adds to growing literature on the importance of HLA B*53 in human disease.^9-11^

Given the high NPV of *HLA-B*53:01* and *HLA-A*32:01* and the serious consequences of AED DILI and DRESS among AA, addition of these HLA alleles might improve the risk stratification at a US population level of commercially available panels, which currently include only *HLA-A*31:01* and *HLA-B*15:02*.^12^ Limitations of our study include its small sample size and lack of AED-exposed controls without DILI. Future studies should be designed to overcome these limitations.

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgments:

Authors thank Ms. Julianne Nanzer and Ms. Alexis Vann for their editorial assistance. Authors thank participants and their families and research personnel for their contributions to the DILIN studies. We also thank NCBI/dbGaP at [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gap](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gap) approved our application to obtain control datasets. We also thank all study participants and research team members involved in these studies. PAGE-BioMe dataset (dbGaP: *phs000925.v1.p1)* was from the Charles Bronfman Institute for Personalized Medicine (IPM) BioMe BioBank at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai (New York). Phenotype data collection was supported by The Andrea and Charles Bronfman Philanthropies. Funding support for genotyping at the Center for Inherited Disease Research (CIDR) was provided by the NIH (U01HG007417).

### Grant Support:

The DILIN ([https://dilin.dcri.duke.edu/](https://dilin.dcri.duke.edu/)) is supported by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) as a Cooperative Agreement (U01s) under the following grants: U01-DK065176 and U24-DK065176 (Duke), U01-DK065211 (Indiana), U01-DK065201 (UNC), U01-DK065184 (Michigan), U01-DK065193 (UConn), U01-DK065238 (UCSF/CPMC), U01-DK083023 (UTSW), U01-DK083020 (USC), U01-DK082992 (Mayo), U01-DK083027 (TJH/UPenn), and U01-DK100928 (Icahn). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

## Abbreviations:

## Footnotes

## Data sharing statement:

Research Data for this article where pertinent are included in the [supplemental material](#SD1). Patient level data are available in a deidentified fashion from the NIDDK repository in accordance with NIH data sharing policies.

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Supplementary Materials

### Data Availability Statement

Research Data for this article where pertinent are included in the [supplemental material](#SD1). Patient level data are available in a deidentified fashion from the NIDDK repository in accordance with NIH data sharing policies.

### Supplementary Materials

### Data Availability Statement

Research Data for this article where pertinent are included in the [supplemental material](#SD1). Patient level data are available in a deidentified fashion from the NIDDK repository in accordance with NIH data sharing policies.

## References

1. Chalasani N, Reddy KR, Fontana RJ, et al. Idiosyncratic drug induced liver injury in African-Americans in associated with greater morbidity and mortality compared to Caucasians. Am J Gastroenterol 2017; 112: 1382–1388  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ajg.2017.215) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5667647/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28762375/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Gastroenterol&title=Idiosyncratic%20drug%20induced%20liver%20injury%20in%20African-Americans%20in%20associated%20with%20greater%20morbidity%20and%20mortality%20compared%20to%20Caucasians&author=N%20Chalasani&author=KR%20Reddy&author=RJ%20Fontana&volume=112&publication_year=2017&pages=1382-1388&pmid=28762375&doi=10.1038/ajg.2017.215&)

2. Mullan KA, Anderson AL, Illing PT, et al. HLA-associated antiepileptic drug-induced cutaneous adverse reactions. HLA 2019; 93: 417–435.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/tan.13530) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30895730/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=HLA&title=HLA-associated%20antiepileptic%20drug-induced%20cutaneous%20adverse%20reactions&author=KA%20Mullan&author=AL%20Anderson&author=PT%20Illing&volume=93&publication_year=2019&pages=417-435&pmid=30895730&doi=10.1111/tan.13530&)

3. Fontana RJ, Li YJ, Phillips E, et al. Allopurinol hepatotoxicity in associated with human leukocyte antigen class I alleles. Liver International 2021; 41; 1884–1893  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/liv.14903) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8286350/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33899326/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Liver%20International&title=Allopurinol%20hepatotoxicity%20in%20associated%20with%20human%20leukocyte%20antigen%20class%20I%20alleles&author=RJ%20Fontana&author=YJ%20Li&author=E%20Phillips&volume=41&publication_year=2021&pages=1884-1893&pmid=33899326&doi=10.1111/liv.14903&)

4. Li YJ, Phillips EJ, Dellinger A, et al. Human leukocyte antigen B*14:01 and B*35:01 are associated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole induced liver injury. Hepatology 2021; 73: 268–281  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.31258) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7544638/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32270503/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hepatology&title=Human%20leukocyte%20antigen%20B*14:01%20and%20B*35:01%20are%20associated%20with%20trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole%20induced%20liver%20injury&author=YJ%20Li&author=EJ%20Phillips&author=A%20Dellinger&volume=73&publication_year=2021&pages=268-281&pmid=32270503&doi=10.1002/hep.31258&)

5. Hoofnagle JH, Bonkovsky HL, Phillips EJ, et al. HLA-B*35:01 and green tea-induced liver injury. Hepatology 2021; 73: 2484–2493  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.31538) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8052949/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32892374/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hepatology&title=HLA-B*35:01%20and%20green%20tea-induced%20liver%20injury&author=JH%20Hoofnagle&author=HL%20Bonkovsky&author=EJ%20Phillips&volume=73&publication_year=2021&pages=2484-2493&pmid=32892374&doi=10.1002/hep.31538&)

6. Cirulli ET, Nicoletta P, Abramson K, et al. A missense variant in PTPN22 is a risk factor for drug-induced liver injury. Gastroenterology 2019;156:1707–1716.e2  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2019.01.034) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6511989/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30664875/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gastroenterology&title=A%20missense%20variant%20in%20PTPN22%20is%20a%20risk%20factor%20for%20drug-induced%20liver%20injury&author=ET%20Cirulli&author=P%20Nicoletta&author=K%20Abramson&volume=156&publication_year=2019&pages=1707-1716.e2&pmid=30664875&doi=10.1053/j.gastro.2019.01.034&)

7. Chalasani N, Bonkovsky HL, Stine JG, et al. Clinical characteristics of antiepileptic-induced liver injury in patients from the DILIN prospective study. J Hepatol 2022;76:832–840  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2021.12.013) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8944173/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34953957/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Hepatol&title=Clinical%20characteristics%20of%20antiepileptic-induced%20liver%20injury%20in%20patients%20from%20the%20DILIN%20prospective%20study&author=N%20Chalasani&author=HL%20Bonkovsky&author=JG%20Stine&volume=76&publication_year=2022&pages=832-840&pmid=34953957&doi=10.1016/j.jhep.2021.12.013&)

8. Thomas M, Hopkins C, Duffy E, et al. Association of the HLA-B*53:01 allele with drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) during treatment of HIV infection with raltegravir. Clin Infect Dis 2017; 64: 1198–1203  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/cix096) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5399947/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28369189/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Infect%20Dis&title=Association%20of%20the%20HLA-B*53:01%20allele%20with%20drug%20reaction%20with%20eosinophilia%20and%20systemic%20symptoms%20(DRESS)%20during%20treatment%20of%20HIV%20infection%20with%20raltegravir&author=M%20Thomas&author=C%20Hopkins&author=E%20Duffy&volume=64&publication_year=2017&pages=1198-1203&pmid=28369189&doi=10.1093/cid/cix096&)

9. Hill AVS, Willis AC, Aidoo M, et al. Molecular analysis of the association of HLA-B52 and resistance to severe malaria. Nature 1992; 360: 434–439  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/360434a0) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1280333/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=Molecular%20analysis%20of%20the%20association%20of%20HLA-B52%20and%20resistance%20to%20severe%20malaria&author=AVS%20Hill&author=AC%20Willis&author=M%20Aidoo&volume=360&publication_year=1992&pages=434-439&pmid=1280333&doi=10.1038/360434a0&)

10. Digitale JC, Callaway PC, Martin M, et al. HLA alleles B*53:01 and C*06:02 are associated with higher risk of P. falcifarum parasitemia in a cohort in Uganda. Front Immunol 2021. Volume 12. March 2021  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.650028) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8017319/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33815410/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front%20Immunol&title=HLA%20alleles%20B*53:01%20and%20C*06:02%20are%20associated%20with%20higher%20risk%20of%20P.%20falcifarum%20parasitemia%20in%20a%20cohort%20in%20Uganda&author=JC%20Digitale&author=PC%20Callaway&author=M%20Martin&volume=12&publication_year=2021&pmid=33815410&doi=10.3389/fimmu.2021.650028&)

11. Norin AH, Mendoza R, Augenbraun M, et al. HLA B53 is associated with a poor outcome in black COVID-19 patients. Hum Immunol 2021; 82: 713–718  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humimm.2021.07.003) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8266522/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34303556/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hum%20Immunol&title=HLA%20B53%20is%20associated%20with%20a%20poor%20outcome%20in%20black%20COVID-19%20patients&author=AH%20Norin&author=R%20Mendoza&author=M%20Augenbraun&volume=82&publication_year=2021&pages=713-718&pmid=34303556&doi=10.1016/j.humimm.2021.07.003&)

12. https://genesight.com/white-papers/get-to-know-a-gene-hla-b1502-and-hla-a3101/ (Accessed on 2/2/2023)  [https://genesight.com/white-papers/get-to-know-a-gene-hla-b1502-and-hla-a3101/](https://genesight.com/white-papers/get-to-know-a-gene-hla-b1502-and-hla-a3101/)
