# COMMON CANDIDATE GENE VARIANTS ARE ASSOCIATED WITH QT INTERVAL DURATION IN THE GENERAL POPULATION

## Metadata
**Authors:** Annukka Marjamaa, Christopher Newton-Cheh, Kimmo Porthan, Antti Reunanen, Päivi Lahermo, Heikki Väänänen, Antti Jula, Hannu Karanko, Heikki Swan, Lauri Toivonen, Markku S Nieminen, Matti Viitasalo, Leena Peltonen, Lasse Oikarinen, Aarno Palotie, Kimmo Kontula, Veikko Salomaa
**Journal:** Journal of internal medicine
**Date:** 2009 Oct 25
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2796.2008.02026.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2796.2008.02026.x)
**PMID:** 19019189
**PMCID:** PMC2668713
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2668713/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2668713/pdf/nihms-102937.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2668713/pdf/nihms-102937.pdf)

## Abstract

**Objectives:** 
QT interval prolongation is associated with increased risk of sudden cardiac death at the population level. Because 30-40% of the QT-interval variability is heritable, we tested the association of common LQTS and NOS1AP gene variants with QT interval in a Finnish population-based sample.

**Methods:** 
We genotyped 12 common LQTS and NOS1AP genetic variants in Health 2000, an epidemiological sample of 5,043 Finnish individuals, using Sequenom MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. ECG parameters were measured from digital 12-lead ECGs and QT intervals were adjusted for age, sex and heart rate with a nomogram (Nc) –method derived from the present study population.

**Results:** 
The KCNE1 D85N minor allele (frequency 1.4%) was associated with a 10.5 ms (SE 1.6) or 0.57 SD prolongation of the adjusted QTNc interval (p=3.6×10−11) in sex-pooled analysis. In agreement with previous studies, we replicated the association with QTNc interval with minor alleles of KCNH2 intronic SNP rs3807375 (1.6 ms (SE 0.4) or 0.08 SD, p=4.7×10−5), KCNH2 K897T (−2.6 ms (SE 0.5) or −0.14 SD, p=2.1×10−7) and NOSA1P variants including rs2880058 (4.0 ms (SE 0.4) or 0.22 SD, p=3.2×10−24) under additive models.

**Conclusions:** 
We demonstrate that each additional copy of the KCNE1 D85N minor allele is associated with a considerable 10.5 ms prolongation of the age-, sex- and heart rate-adjusted QT interval, and could thus modulate repolarization-related arrhythmia susceptibility at the population level. In addition, we robustly confirm the previous findings that three independent KCNH2 and NOSA1P variants are associated with adjusted QT interval.

Keywords: long-QT syndrome, QT interval, genetics, KCNE1, epidemiology

### Objectives

QT interval prolongation is associated with increased risk of sudden cardiac death at the population level. Because 30-40% of the QT-interval variability is heritable, we tested the association of common LQTS and *NOS1AP* gene variants with QT interval in a Finnish population-based sample.

### Methods

We genotyped 12 common LQTS and *NOS1AP* genetic variants in Health 2000, an epidemiological sample of 5,043 Finnish individuals, using Sequenom MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. ECG parameters were measured from digital 12-lead ECGs and QT intervals were adjusted for age, sex and heart rate with a nomogram (Nc) –method derived from the present study population.

### Results

The *KCNE1* D85N minor allele (frequency 1.4%) was associated with a 10.5 ms (SE 1.6) or 0.57 SD prolongation of the adjusted QT_Nc_ interval (p=3.6×10^−11^) in sex-pooled analysis. In agreement with previous studies, we replicated the association with QT_Nc_ interval with minor alleles of *KCNH2* intronic SNP rs3807375 (1.6 ms (SE 0.4) or 0.08 SD, p=4.7×10^−5^), *KCNH2* K897T (−2.6 ms (SE 0.5) or −0.14 SD, p=2.1×10^−7^) and *NOSA1P* variants including rs2880058 (4.0 ms (SE 0.4) or 0.22 SD, p=3.2×10^−24^) under additive models.

### Conclusions

We demonstrate that each additional copy of the *KCNE1 ***D**85N **minor** allele is associated with a considerable 10.5 ms prolongation of the age-, sex- and heart rate-adjusted QT interval, and could thus modulate repolarization-related arrhythmia susceptibility at the population level. In addition, we robustly confirm the previous findings that three independent *KCNH2* and *NOSA1P* variants are associated with adjusted QT interval.

## INTRODUCTION

Prolonged cardiac repolarization may associate with increased morbidity and mortality in the general population [[1](#R1), [2](#R2)]. The distinctive feature in long QT syndrome (LQTS) is the prolongation of the QT interval on the surface ECG and high risk for ventricular tachyarrhythmias [[3](#R3), [4](#R4)]. The underlying mechanisms involve mutations in ten genes coding for predominantly cardiac ion channels [[5](#R5)]. However, these disorders are collectively rare with a recent prevalence estimate of 1/2000 for LQTS [[6](#R6)] and therefore cannot account for the increased population risk of ventricular arrhythmias or sudden death.

Approximately 30-40% of the variation in QT interval duration is heritable [[7](#R7)-[9](#R9)]. Several epidemiological surveys have reported common ion channel polymorphisms to be associated with QT interval duration with varying levels of statistical support [[10](#R10)-[13](#R13)]. In addition, a genome-wide association study recently identified genetic variation at *NOS1AP* as a modulator of repolarization [[14](#R14), [15](#R15)], not directly through ion channel function but perhaps by regulating intra-cardiac signaling. In the present survey, we assessed the effects of common LQTS gene variants and the recently characterized *NOS1AP* variants on QT interval duration utilizing a large, epidemiological cohort from the Finnish population.

## METHODS

### Study Population

The study population consisted of a two-stage stratified cluster sample of 8,028 individuals drawn from the Finnish Population Information System ([http://www.vaestorekisterikeskus.fi/vrk/home.nsf/www/populationinformationsystem](http://www.vaestorekisterikeskus.fi/vrk/home.nsf/www/populationinformationsystem)) for the Health 2000 survey. The material was collected between September 2000 and June 2001, and it is representative of the entire Finnish population of age ≥ 30 years [[16](#R16)]. DNA samples were collected from 6,334 individuals, and digital standard 12-lead ECGs were available from a total of 6,295 study participants. Clinical characteristics including medications, prior heart failure, history of myocardial infarction, prevalent diabetes and smoking status were determined as described previously [[16](#R16)]. Subjects with complete left or right bundle branch block (n=143), QRS duration ≥ 120 ms (n=205), atrial fibrillation/flutter (n=94), pacemaker (n=12), use of QT interval altering medication including digoxin (n=1064) or confirmed genetic diagnosis for one of four Finnish LQTS founder mutations [[17](#R17)] were excluded from the study population. A drug was considered to potentially prolong QT interval if it was listed in any of the four categories at the website [www.qtdrugs.org](http://www.qtdrugs.org) (accessed November 2006). In addition, we excluded individuals taking any of the following additional agents that might affect the rate of ventricular repolarization: carbamazepine, flupentixol, levomepromazine, mefloquine, olanzapine, oxcarbazepine, periciazin, sertindole and trazodone. The final study population included 5,043 individuals. The study was performed according to the declarations of Helsinki and was approved by the Ethical Committees of the Hospital District of Helsinki and Uusimaa and the National Public Health Institute. A written informed consent was obtained from the participants.

### Genetic Analyses

Eight nonsynonymous LQTS gene variants were selected for genotyping based on the following criteria: 1) the variant had been identified in the Finnish population based on our previous studies on LQTS [[17](#R17)] and 2) the variant had evidence for a functional role in modifying cardiac repolarization in the literature (i.e. association with LQTS and/or QT interval duration or suggestive *in vitro* data). In addition, we assessed four recently described *NOS1AP* single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and an intronic *KCNH2* rs3807375 SNP that have been reported to be associated with QT interval duration in other population samples [[12](#R12), [15](#R15)]. Genotyping was performed using Sequenom MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry (MassArray Compact Analyzer, Sequenom Inc, San Diego, CA, U.S.A.) and Applied Biosystems TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assay (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, U.S.A.) according to manufacturer's instructions (online [Data Supplement Methods](#SD3)). All SNPs were tested for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium with a chi-square test.

### ECG measurements

A digital standard 12-lead ECG was recorded with Marquette MAC 5000 (GE Marquette Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI, U.S.A.). The 12 leads were recorded simultaneously, and a digital median QRS-T complex was used for analyses. We used QT Guard software (GE Marquette Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI, U.S.A.) to measure heart rate, and a custom-made software for all other measurements. The QT interval measurements were based on a previously described and validated algorithm [[18](#R18)]. The software calculates QT interval from QRS onset to T-wave offset, and a single observer (K.P.) reviewed measurements on-screen in a blinded fashion. For final analyses, we used the mean QT interval from all 12 leads. The intraobserver coefficient of variation was 0.7% for the mean QT interval in repeated ECG measurements in our recent study [[19](#R19)], and the same measurement methods were used also in the present survey. QT intervals were nomogram-corrected (Nc) for heart rate [[20](#R20)]. The correction equations were determined separately for each 10 beats per minute (bpm) heart rate range in the current study based on a previously described method [[20](#R20)]. In addition, the SNPs were tested for association with age-, sex- and RR interval- (heart rate) adjusted QT intervals. Left ventricular hypertrophy was considered to be present if Sokolow-Lyon voltage >35 mm[[21](#R21)] and/or gender-adjusted Cornell voltage-duration product >2440 mm·ms [[22](#R22)] was observed.

### Statistical analyses

Histograms of all the variables were reviewed for normality. Using a stepwise linear regression model, we adjusted the mean QT_Nc_ intervals for age and sex [[23](#R23), [24](#R24)] and determined the beta coefficient, 2-tailed p-value and partial R^2^ for each covariate in the model. In addition, we tested additional covariates i.e. left ventricular hypertrophy, acute myocardial infarction, heart failure, prevalent diabetes, smoking, diuretics usage and geographical area for a possible explanatory role in the model. As these additional covariates accounted for less than 1% of the variation of QT_Nc_ interval in the study population, did not reach strong statistical significance (p>0.001) and in order to use a measure comparable to other studies, the QT_Nc_ residuals were derived from the age- and sex-adjusted model. The histograms of output residuals from the adjusted model were reviewed for normality (skewness 0.39, SE 0.03, kurtosis 1.10, SE 0.07). We tested for association using both a one-degree (1df) additive model and a two-degree freedom (2df) general test. In the 1df-test, we transformed the genotype to a continuous variable that corresponded to the number of minor alleles (0, 1, 2). Appropriateness of an additive genetic model was confirmed by evaluating the genotype-specific means for the QT_Nc_ residuals. In the 2df-test, the heterozygote and minor homozygote genotypes were converted to two dichotomous variables, with the major homozygote genotype as the reference. Nominal p-values are shown throughout the text without adjustment for multiple hypotheses. The Bonferroni-corrected [[25](#R25)] alpha level would be p=5.0×10^−3^ (0.05/10), considering the strongly correlated *NOS1AP* variants are counted as a single test. Hence the total number of independent tests is 10. The prevalence estimates with 95% confidence intervals were derived from the weighted study population as described earlier [[16](#R16)]. Using four SNPs associated with QT interval duration, we constructed a QT-prolonging score composed of the sum of the predicted QT-prolonging effect of each genotype in milliseconds and tested for association of the genotype-score with QT_Nc_ on a continuous scale and in quintiles. The statistical analyses were performed in the SPSS 13.0/15.0 software (SPSS Inc, Chicago, Illinois, USA).

The authors had full access to and take full responsibility for the integrity of the data. All authors have read and agree to the manuscript as written.

## RESULTS

The clinical characteristics of the study population are presented in [Table 1](#T1). All selected SNPs were analyzed in the course of the study. Genotyping call rates ranged from 97.6 to 99.9% of the study sample, and all SNPs were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (p>0.01). The genotype frequencies did not differ between males and females. The sex-pooled genotype-specific mean QT_Nc_ intervals are shown in [Table 2](#T2). The results from the linear regression analysis of the age- and sex-adjusted mean QT_Nc_ are summarized in [Table 3](#T3).

### Table 1.

|   | Females | Males | Both |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Number | 2,691 (53) | 2,352 (47) | 5,043 |
| Age, yr | 52.4 ± 14.9 (30-97) | 50.2 ± 13.1 (30-97) | 51.4 ± 14.1 (30-97) |
| Heart rate, bpm | 64.1 ± 10.4 (37-120) | 62.3 ± 11.1 (34-113) | 63.3 ± 10.7 (34-120) |
| Mean QT interval, ms | 391.9 ± 29.6 (288-532) | 384.7 ± 29.7 (279-536) | 388.5 ± 30 (279-536) |
| Mean QTNc interval, ms | 398.9 ± 18.7 (338-512) | 387.6 ± 19.3 (323-514) | 393.6 ± 19.8 (323-514) |
| Mean QTc interval, ms | 401.9 ± 20.4 (333-504) | 388.6 ± 22.1 (323-514) | 395.7 ± 22.2 (323-514) |
| Left ventricular hypertrophy | 418 (15.5) | 459 (19.5) | 877 (17.4) |
| Prevalent heart failure | 31 (1.2) | 8 (0.3) | 39 (0.8) |
| History of myocardial infarction | 35 (1.3) | 77 (3.3) | 112 (2.2) |
| Prevalent diabetes | 82 (3.0) | 105 (4.5) | 187 (3.7) |
| Current smoking | 457 (17.0) | 670 (28.5) | 1127 (22.3) |
| Diuretic usage | 72 (2.7) | 28 (1.2) | 100 (2.0) |

Table 1 Caption: Clinical Characteristics of the Health 2000 Study Sample (n=5,043)

### Table 2.

| Gene | SNP | Amino acid change | Major homozygotes |  | Heterozygotes |  | Minor homozygotes |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   |   |   |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|   |   | % | QTNc | % | QTNc | % | QTNc |  |
| KCNH2 | rs3807375 |   | 32.4 | 392.2 | 49.4 | 393.9 | 18.2 | 394.8 |
| KCNH2 | rs1805123 | K897T | 67.9 | 394.3 | 28.8 | 392.0 | 3.3 | 389.8 |
| KCNH2 | rs36210421 | R1047L | 86.8 | 393.6 | 12.6 | 392.8 | 0.7 | 383.8 |
| SCN5A |   | R190G | 99.1 | 391.9 | 0.9 | 393.6 | 0 |   |
| SCN5A | rs1805124 | H558R | 64.0 | 392.9 | 32.0 | 394.3 | 4.0 | 396.9 |
| SCN5A |   | A572D | 93.8 | 393.5 | 6.1 | 393.4 | 0.1 | 400.0 |
| KCNE1 | rs1805128 | D85N | 97.3 | 393.2 | 2.6 | 403.7 | 0.1 | 414.6 |
| KCNE1 | rs1805127 | G38S | 34.4 | 393.1 | 49.0 | 393.7 | 16.6 | 393.9 |
| KCNE2 | rs2234916 | T8A | 99.0 | 393.5 | 1.0 | 392.9 | 0 |   |
| NOS1AP | rs2880058 |   | 42.3 | 390.5 | 45.5 | 395.0 | 12.2 | 398.2 |
| NOS1AP | rs4657139 |   | 41.3 | 390.4 | 46.1 | 395.0 | 12.6 | 397.8 |
| NOS1AP | rs10918594 |   | 43.8 | 390.7 | 44.0 | 395.1 | 12.3 | 398.0 |
| NOS1AP | rs10494366 |   | 41.6 | 390.7 | 45.7 | 394.9 | 12.7 | 397.5 |

Table 2 Caption: Mean QTNc Intervals by Genotype for 12 Candidate Gene Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms

### Table 3.

| Gene | SNP | Genotypic Model |  |  |  | Allelic Model |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   |   | Heterozygote | Minor homozygote | P 2 df | R2 | Per minor allele | P 1 df | R2 |
| KCNH2 | rs3807375 | 2.1 (0.12) | 2.9 (0.16) | 1.4×10−4 | 0.004 | 1.6 (0.08) | 4.7×10−5 | 0.004 |
| KCNH2 | K897T | −2.6 (−0.14) | −4.9 (−0.27) | 1.4×10−6 | 0.006 | −2.6 (−0.14) | 2.1×10−7 | 0.006 |
| KCNH2 | R1047L | −0.5 (−0.03) | −10.8 (−0.58) | 4.0×10−3 | 0.002 | −1.5 (−0.08) | 4.9×10−2 | 0.001 |
| SCN5A | R190G | −0.5(−0.03) | - | 8.5×10−1 | 0.000 | −0.5(−0.03) | 8.5×10−1 | 0.000 |
| SCN5A | H558R | 1.4 (0.08) | 3.1 (0.17) | 6.6×10−3 | 0.002 | 1.5 (0.08) | 2.0×10−3 | 0.002 |
| SCN5A | A572D | 0.3 (0.02) | 7.1 (0.39) | 7.2×10−1 | 0.000 | 0.5 (0.03) | 6.6×10−1 | 0.000 |
| KCNE1 | D85N | 10.5 (0.57) | 20.6 (1.12) | 3.1×10−10 | 0.009 | 10.5 (0.57) | 3.6×10−11 | 0.009 |
| KCNE1 | G38S | 0.6 (0.03) | 0.7 (0.04) | 5.1×10−1 | 0.000 | 0.4 (0.02) | 2.9×10−1 | 0.000 |
| KCNE2 | T8A | 0.1 (0.01) | − | 9.8×10−1 | 0.000 | 0.1 (0.01) | 9.8×10−1 | 0.000 |
| NOS1AP | rs2880058 | 4.5 (0.24) | 7.7 (0.41) | 2.3×10−23 | 0.021 | 4.0 (0.22) | 3.2×10−24 | 0.021 |
| NOS1AP | rs4657139 | 4.5 (0.24) | 7.5 (0.41) | 4.9×10−23 | 0.022 | 4.0 (0.22) | 9.0×10−24 | 0.021 |
| NOS1AP | rs10918594 | 3.9 (0.21) | 6.5 (0.35) | 2.2×10−22 | 0.021 | 3.9 (0.21) | 8.7×10−23 | 0.020 |
| NOS1AP | rs10494366 | 4.0 (0.22) | 6.6 (0.36) | 4.6×10−18 | 0.016 | 3.5 (0.19) | 8.3×10−19 | 0.016 |

Table 3 Caption: Effect of SNPs on Age, Sex and Heart Rate (Nc) -Adjusted QT Interval in Health 2000

*KCNE1* D85N (rs 1805128) minor allele was identifiable in 127 study participants in heterozygous form resulting in a prevalence estimate of 2.6% [95% CI 2.2-3.2] in the population, and three subjects were homozygous carriers of the allele. Each additional copy of the D85N minor allele was associated with a 10.5 ms higher adjusted QT interval (SE 1.6, p=3.6−10^−11^). Accordingly, while the mean QT_Nc_ interval in subjects without this allele was 393 ± 20 ms (n=4684), the corresponding value in D85N heterozygotes was 404 ± 20 ms (n=127) and 415 ± 23 ms in homozygotes (n=3).

A 2.6 ms (SE 0.5, p=2.1−10^−7^) shortening of the adjusted QT_Nc_ was observed per *KCNH2* K897T minor allele. The *KCNH2* intronic SNP rs3807375 was associated with a 1.6 ms (SE 0.4) increase of adjusted QT interval per minor allele QT_Nc_ (p=4.7×10^−5^). The SNP rs3807375 has previously been tested under a dominant model [[12](#R12)], and therefore we analyzed this intronic variant accordingly (effect size 2.3 ms, SE 0.6, p=5.4×10^−5^ ). The four *NOS1AP* variants were in strong LD (online [Data Supplement Table 2](#SD2)) and resulted in statistically significant association with age- and sex-adjusted QT_Nc_ under an additive model of inheritance. The strongest association was observed for SNP rs2880058 with a 4.0 ms (SE 0.4) increase of adjusted QT interval per minor allele copy (p=3.2×10^−24^). The effect sizes and significance of each SNP on age-, sex- and RR interval-adjusted mean QT interval were similar to the age- and sex-adjusted mean QT_Nc_ (data not shown). Secondary analyses excluding all individuals older than 60 years, with QTc ≥ 500 ms, history of myocardial infarction and prevalent heart failure did not alter the results (data not shown). A secondary analysis excluding individuals with a history of myocardial infarction yielded equivalent results.

Using the genotype effect size for each of the four SNPs *KCNH2* rs3807375 and K897T, *KCNE1* D85N and *NOS1AP* rs2880058, we constructed a score ranging from 0 to 35.0 points based on the effect in milliseconds of each QT-prolonging genotype relative to the reference genotype. A score of 0 results for an individual who carries none of the genotypes associated with longer QT interval. A 1 point increase in the QT-prolonging score was associated with a 0.89 ms increase in the age- and sex-adjusted QT_Nc_ interval (p=4.6×10^−38^). For each quintile increase in the QT-prolonging score, the adjusted QT_Nc_ interval increased 2.4 ms (p=1.6×10^−32^). Accordingly, the mean QT_Nc_ in the first quintile was 388 ± 19 ms compared to a mean QT_Nc_ of 398 ± 20 ms in individuals in the fifth quintile (p=8.3×10^−23^). In addition, the odds ratio for a prolonged QT_Nc_ interval (QT_Nc_>419 ms, the upper 90^th^ percentile) was 1.11 [95% CI 1.08-1.13] per quintile increase in the QT-prolonging score (p=1.5×10^−16^).

## DISCUSSION

### Principal Findings

Using a large, epidemiological study cohort of more than 5,000 individuals of Finnish origin with well-characterized ECG phenotypes, we report association of three common LQTS gene variants in *KCNE1* and *KCNH2* and several correlated *NOS1AP* variants with QT interval duration.

### KCNE1 D85N association

The most notable finding was the strong association of the *KCNE1* D85N variant [[26](#R26)], present in 2.6% of the population and resulting in a 10.5 ms age, sex- and nomogram-corrected QT-interval prolongation in heterozygous individuals. In a prior report by Gouas et al, this polymorphism in minK, the regulatory subunit of *I*_Ks_ channel, was examined in 200 subjects with the shortest and 200 with the longest QT interval from among 2,008 participants in a French community-based study [[10](#R10)]. Minor allele carriers had an increased odds of being in the longer QT group (p=0.03).

In studies based on clinical samples, the **D**85N has been identified in solitary patients with *torsade de pointes* in the absence of recognizable disease-causing mutations in other LQTS genes [[27](#R27), [28](#R28)]. Wei et al studied 96 acquired LQTS patients and 46 subjects with normal QT intervals following anti-arrhythmic drug therapy [[29](#R29)]. *KCNE1* D85N appeared more prevalent in acquired LQTS subjects (7.3%) than in drug-tolerant patients (2.2%) [[29](#R29)]. Salisbury et al identified 11 carriers (11%) of **D**85N in a cohort of 98 LQTS-gene negative patients whereas 364 healthy controls had a significantly lower minor allele frequency with only nine heterozygous carriers (2.5%) [[30](#R30)]. A study by Westenskow et al reported *KCNE1* D85N in altogether thirteen carriers of LQTS-causing *KCNQ1* or *KCNH2* mutations who had evidence of a longer QTc compared to the non-carriers of the **D**85N **minor** allele [[31](#R31)]. *In vitro* electrophysiological studies have suggested a functional role of the D85N in reducing the *I*_Ks_ current under voltage clamp conditions [[31](#R31), [32](#R32)].

Thus, in aggregate substantial evidence supports the role of the *KCNE1* D85N as a modifier of long QT syndrome and drug-induced *torsade de pointes*. Our finding of a striking effect of this SNP on baseline QT interval duration in a large unselected population supports the relevance of this variant to the general population. Ultimately, these findings may contribute to identification of patients with genetically determined reduced repolarization reserve[[33](#R33), [34](#R34)] and increased risk of arrhythmias in general (LQTS) or upon exposure to QT-prolonging drugs.

### KCNH2 (HERG) K897T and rs3807375 associations

We were the first group to report the common **K897T** substitution in the *KCNH2* gene and proposed a plausible mild phenotypic effect of this variant among female LQTS1 patients [[35](#R35)]. Upon studying 1,030 Caucasian men and women, Bezzina et al described longer QTc interval duration among carriers of the **K897T** major allele consistent with our earlier findings [[36](#R36)]. Gouas et al showed a higher frequency of the K897T minor alleles among 200 individuals with the shortest QTc intervals from 2,008 healthy French subjects [[10](#R10)]. Pfeufer et al reported a nearly 2 ms shortening of the QT interval per **K897T** minor allele copy in a population-based study of 3,966 individuals from southern Germany [[13](#R13)] similar to the most recent findings by Newton-Cheh et al [[12](#R12)]. Conflicting results exist in a study of randomly selected healthy Finnish individuals which observed QT prolongation among female carriers of the minor allele [[37](#R37)]. Discrepant results have also been reported among the numerous *in vitro* electrophysiological experiments concerning the functional consequences of the *KCNH2* K897T polymorphisms [[36](#R36), [38](#R38)-[40](#R40)]. In fact, the consequences of the K897T variant may differ in patients with varying degree of genetically modified *I*_Kr_ current [[40](#R40)]. Nevertheless, our present results confirm the majority of *in vivo* findings that the **K897T** minor allele is associated with moderate shortening of the QT interval under resting conditions.

In addition, we replicate the finding that an intronic *KCNH2* SNP (rs3807375) is associated with QT interval under an additive or dominant genetic model, as previously reported by Newton-Cheh et al [[12](#R12)]. This variant marks a pair of haplotypes at the locus, one of which was found to be associated with QT interval duration in the same direction in a study by Pfeufer et al [[13](#R13)]. The missense K897T and intronic rs3807375 show weak correlation (*r2*=0.15) and thus likely represent independent signals.

### NOS1AP variant association

In addition to the LQTS gene polymorphisms, we robustly confirmed the association of rs10494366 and three other *NOS1AP* SNPs in linkage disequilibrium, all of which showed association of minor alleles with longer QT interval (p=8.3×10^−19^ to 3.2×10^−24^). The stronger statistical support up to five orders of magnitude suggests that SNPs other than rs10494366 are more strongly correlated to the as yet unrecognized causal variant. A genome-wide association study by Arking et al first reported the association of *NOS1AP* rs10494366 with modest but consistent QT prolongation [[14](#R14)], and subsequently these results have been replicated in a total of five published independent population-based samples until now [[14](#R14), [15](#R15), [41](#R41)]. The pathophysiological mechanisms mediating the *NOS1AP* effect on myocardial repolarization remain to be elucidated, but it is now evident that these SNPs, explaining up to 2% of the variation of QT interval in our model, do indeed modify myocardial repolarization.

### SCN5A H558R variant possible association

*SCN5A* H558R [[42](#R42)] has been under intense investigation for a contribution to various arrhythmias including atrial fibrillation [[43](#R43)] and Brugada syndrome [[44](#R44)], but its role in myocardial repolarization has remained uncertain among community-based samples. Gouas et al reported modest association of the **H**558R **minor** allele with an increased odds of being in the longer QTc group in the D.E.S.I.R. study (p=0.01) [[10](#R10)]. Similarly, a study by Aydin et al demonstrated an association of **H558R** minor allele on QT interval prolongation in a twin cohort (p=0.025) [[45](#R45)]. We find modest replication of the association of the **H558R** minor allele with a 1.5 ms increase in age-, sex- and nomogram-corrected QT for each minor allele (p=2.0×10^−3^), but consider the existing evidence of association of this variant with QT interval duration to be inconclusive.

### Other LQTS gene variants

*KCNH2* R1047L [[46](#R46)] has been described to be associated with dofetilide-induced *torsade de pointes* [[28](#R28), [47](#R47)], and leads to slower activation and inactivation kinetics *in vitro* [[47](#R47)]. According to our previous molecular genetic studies in LQTS patients, *SCN5A* A572D [[48](#R48)] and **SCN5A R190G [17]** appear to be slightly enriched among LQTS patients (6% vs. 4% controls for A572D **and 2% vs 0.6% controls for R190G)** [[17](#R17)]. *KCNE1* G38S [[49](#R49)] was reported to be associated with QT prolongation in men in a family-based study from Israel [[50](#R50)], but a study by Akyol et al in a German sample did not find a modifying effect of the **G**38S **minor** allele on QT interval duration [[51](#R51)], nor did the smaller study by Gouas et al [[11](#R11)]. The polymorphism *KCNE2* T8A has previously been reported to be associated with drug-induced *torsade de pointes* [[27](#R27), [52](#R52), [53](#R53)], but recently a study by Pfeufer et al found no effect of this SNP on QT at the population level [[13](#R13)]. Based on our analyses in over 5,000 genotyped and phenotyped individuals, the *KCNH2* R1047L, *SCN5A* A572D, **SCN5A R190G, ***KCNE1* G38S and *KCNE2* T8A polymorphisms seem unlikely to modify the resting QT interval to a large extent in the Finnish population. It is unsettled, however, whether these variants account for alterations in QT interval in interaction with other genetic factors or with extrinsic stresses such as exercise, hypokalemia, ischemic or structural heart disease or **drug exposure** [[54](#R54)].

### Potential clinical impact

Despite the marked significance levels in the current study, the allelic effect sizes remain relatively modest with the exception of *KCNE1* D85N. The R^2^ values are all under 2.5% despite the noticeable prevalence of these common variants and reflect the relatively modest effects of these variants. Since QT interval prolongation is associated with increased mortality in patients with chronic [[55](#R55)] and acute [[2](#R2)] coronary artery disease and in men with cardiovascular disease [[56](#R56)] as well as in the general population [[1](#R1), [57](#R57)], even subtle additive changes may reduce repolarization reserve and contribute to increased risk of arrhythmias. Furthermore, even small changes caused by common variants may become important at the population level. In the present survey, we constructed a genotype score of four validated QT-altering SNPs. The 10 ms difference in mean QT_Nc_ intervals among individuals with QT prolonging scores below the 20^th^ and greater than the 80^th^ percentiles of the QT genotype score is comparable to the QT prolonging effects of drugs withdrawn from the market [[58](#R58)] and thus potentially of clinical importance. Nevertheless, as about one third of the variation in QT interval duration is heritable [[8](#R8)], and the SNPs in the present study explain only a fraction of that, it is evident that other as yet unidentified heritable factors, independently or in interaction, must contribute to variability in cardiac repolarization.

### Study Strengths and Limitations

The strength of the current study builds on the large, stratified cluster sample of over 5,000 individuals with surface ECGs and DNA that was designed to reflect the whole Finnish population of ≥ 30 years old. The collection of clinical data without regard to phenotype enabled assessment of potential confounding factors. Systematic evaluation of the ECG parameters by a single observer yielded precise ECG phenotypes. The correction for heart rate was based on the nomogram-method from the present study population thus allowing accurate adjustments. Furthermore, the availability of alternative methods for adjusting QT interval for heart rate (nomogram, RR-interval in a linear model) and the equivalence of results from them confirms the general relevance of the findings in the current study sample and in other populations that may use different QT adjusting methods. In order to detect more subtle effects, an even larger population sample would be required. This limitation applies particularly to the four SNPs that failed to demonstrate statistically significant effects on the evaluated QT parameters. Our study involved participants of Finnish origin only. Since the association studies on myocardial repolarization have thus far been restricted to the European ancestry, we cannot draw any definitive conclusions regarding the effects of these variants in populations of other ancestries.

## CONCLUSIONS

In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the *KCNE1* D85N missense SNP is associated with a 10.5 ms prolongation of the age-, sex- and nomogram-adjusted QT interval. Despite the relative infrequency of the polymorphism, this variant stands as a plausible independent risk factor for repolarization-related arrhythmogenesis. In addition, we have convincingly replicated the association of the *KCNH2* intronic rs3807375 and missense K897T SNPs, and several correlated *NOS1AP* variants in modulating the QT interval duration at the population level.

## Supplementary Material

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Susanna Tverin, Pirkko Alha, Harri Rissanen, Anu Yliperttula and Sirkka Ekström are acknowledged for skilful technical assistance. The study was financially supported by grants from the Sigrid Juselius Foundation and the Finnish Academy to Dr. Kontula. Dr. Marjamaa has received funding from the Finska Läkaresälskapet Foundation. Dr. Newton-Cheh is supported by NIH K23HL080025, a Doris Duke Charitable Foundation Clinical Scientist Development Award and a Burroughs Wellcome Fund Career Award for Medical Scientists. Dr. Porthan has received funding from the Aarne Koskelo Foundation, the Finnish Foundation for Cardiovascular Research, the Ida Montin Foundation, the Paavo and Eila Salonen Foundation.

## Footnotes

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Supplementary Materials

### Supplementary Materials

## References

1. Schouten EG, Dekker JM, Meppelink P, Kok FJ, Vandenbroucke JP, Pool J. QT interval prolongation predicts cardiovascular mortality in an apparently healthy population. Circulation. 1991;84:1516–23. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.84.4.1516.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.84.4.1516) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1914093/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=QT%20interval%20prolongation%20predicts%20cardiovascular%20mortality%20in%20an%20apparently%20healthy%20population&author=EG%20Schouten&author=JM%20Dekker&author=P%20Meppelink&author=FJ%20Kok&author=JP%20Vandenbroucke&volume=84&publication_year=1991&pages=1516-23&pmid=1914093&doi=10.1161/01.cir.84.4.1516&)

2. Schwartz PJ, Wolf S. QT interval prolongation as predictor of sudden death in patients with myocardial infarction. Circulation. 1978;57:1074–7. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.57.6.1074.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.57.6.1074) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/639227/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=QT%20interval%20prolongation%20as%20predictor%20of%20sudden%20death%20in%20patients%20with%20myocardial%20infarction&author=PJ%20Schwartz&author=S%20Wolf&volume=57&publication_year=1978&pages=1074-7&pmid=639227&doi=10.1161/01.cir.57.6.1074&)

3. Schwartz PJ. The congenital long QT syndromes from genotype to phenotype: clinical implications. J Intern Med. 2006;259:39–47. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2005.01583.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2796.2005.01583.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16336512/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Intern%20Med&title=The%20congenital%20long%20QT%20syndromes%20from%20genotype%20to%20phenotype:%20clinical%20implications&author=PJ%20Schwartz&volume=259&publication_year=2006&pages=39-47&pmid=16336512&doi=10.1111/j.1365-2796.2005.01583.x&)

4. Priori SG. Inherited arrhythmogenic diseases: the complexity beyond monogenic disorders. Circ Res. 2004;94:140–5. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000115750.12807.7E.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.0000115750.12807.7E) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14764649/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circ%20Res&title=Inherited%20arrhythmogenic%20diseases:%20the%20complexity%20beyond%20monogenic%20disorders&author=SG%20Priori&volume=94&publication_year=2004&pages=140-5&pmid=14764649&doi=10.1161/01.RES.0000115750.12807.7E&)

5. Priori SGNC, Schwartz PJ. Genetics of cardiac arrhythmias. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Zipes DP, editors. Braunwald's Heart Disease: 8th Edition. Saunders Elsevier; Philadelphia, PA: 2008. pp. 101–9.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Braunwald's%20Heart%20Disease:%208th%20Edition&author=SGNC%20Priori&author=PJ%20Schwartz&publication_year=2008&)

6. Stramba-Badiale MCL, Goulene K, Pedrazzini M, Mannarino S, Salice P, Bosi G, Nespoli L, Rimini A, Gabbarini F, Rosati E, Schwartz PJ. Electrocardiographic and genetic screening for long QT syndrome: results from a prospective study on 44,596 neonates. Circulation. 2007;116(Supplement):II_377.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Electrocardiographic%20and%20genetic%20screening%20for%20long%20QT%20syndrome:%20results%20from%20a%20prospective%20study%20on%2044,596%20neonates&author=MCL%20Stramba-Badiale&author=K%20Goulene&author=M%20Pedrazzini&author=S%20Mannarino&author=P%20Salice&volume=116&issue=Supplement&publication_year=2007&pages=II_377&)

7. Hong Y, Rautaharju PM, Hopkins PN, et al. Familial aggregation of QT-interval variability in a general population: results from the NHLBI Family Heart Study. Clin Genet. 2001;59:171–7. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.2001.590305.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1399-0004.2001.590305.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11260226/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Genet&title=Familial%20aggregation%20of%20QT-interval%20variability%20in%20a%20general%20population:%20results%20from%20the%20NHLBI%20Family%20Heart%20Study&author=Y%20Hong&author=PM%20Rautaharju&author=PN%20Hopkins&volume=59&publication_year=2001&pages=171-7&pmid=11260226&doi=10.1034/j.1399-0004.2001.590305.x&)

8. Newton-Cheh C, Larson MG, Corey DC, et al. QT interval is a heritable quantitative trait with evidence of linkage to chromosome 3 in a genome-wide linkage analysis: The Framingham Heart Study. Heart Rhythm. 2005;2:277–84. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2004.11.009.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrthm.2004.11.009) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15851319/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Heart%20Rhythm&title=QT%20interval%20is%20a%20heritable%20quantitative%20trait%20with%20evidence%20of%20linkage%20to%20chromosome%203%20in%20a%20genome-wide%20linkage%20analysis:%20The%20Framingham%20Heart%20Study&author=C%20Newton-Cheh&author=MG%20Larson&author=DC%20Corey&volume=2&publication_year=2005&pages=277-84&pmid=15851319&doi=10.1016/j.hrthm.2004.11.009&)

9. Akylbekova ELCR, Johnson WD, Buxbaum SG, Njemanze S, Fox E, Sarpong D, Taylor HA, Newton-Cheh C. Clinical correlates and heritability of QT interval duration in African Americans: the Jackson Heart Study. Circulation. 2007;116:781. doi: 10.1161/CIRCEP.109.858894.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCEP.109.858894) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2772163/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19808499/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Clinical%20correlates%20and%20heritability%20of%20QT%20interval%20duration%20in%20African%20Americans:%20the%20Jackson%20Heart%20Study&author=ELCR%20Akylbekova&author=WD%20Johnson&author=SG%20Buxbaum&author=S%20Njemanze&author=E%20Fox&volume=116&publication_year=2007&pages=781&pmid=19808499&doi=10.1161/CIRCEP.109.858894&)

10. Gouas L, Nicaud V, Berthet M, Forhan A, Tiret L, Balkau B, Guicheney P. Association of KCNQ1, KCNE1, KCNH2 and SCN5A polymorphisms with QTc interval length in a healthy population. Eur J Hum Genet. 2005;13:1213–22. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201489.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201489) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16132053/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20J%20Hum%20Genet&title=Association%20of%20KCNQ1,%20KCNE1,%20KCNH2%20and%20SCN5A%20polymorphisms%20with%20QTc%20interval%20length%20in%20a%20healthy%20population&author=L%20Gouas&author=V%20Nicaud&author=M%20Berthet&author=A%20Forhan&author=L%20Tiret&volume=13&publication_year=2005&pages=1213-22&pmid=16132053&doi=10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201489&)

11. Gouas L, Nicaud V, Chaouch S, et al. Confirmation of associations between ion channel gene SNPs and QTc interval duration in healthy subjects. Eur J Hum Genet. 2007;15:974–9. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201866.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201866) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2234597/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17534376/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20J%20Hum%20Genet&title=Confirmation%20of%20associations%20between%20ion%20channel%20gene%20SNPs%20and%20QTc%20interval%20duration%20in%20healthy%20subjects&author=L%20Gouas&author=V%20Nicaud&author=S%20Chaouch&volume=15&publication_year=2007&pages=974-9&pmid=17534376&doi=10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201866&)

12. Newton-Cheh C, Guo CY, Larson MG, et al. Common Genetic Variation in KCNH2 Is Associated With QT Interval Duration: The Framingham Heart Study. Circulation. 2007;116:1128–36. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.710780.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.710780) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17709632/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Common%20Genetic%20Variation%20in%20KCNH2%20Is%20Associated%20With%20QT%20Interval%20Duration:%20The%20Framingham%20Heart%20Study&author=C%20Newton-Cheh&author=CY%20Guo&author=MG%20Larson&volume=116&publication_year=2007&pages=1128-36&pmid=17709632&doi=10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.710780&)

13. Pfeufer A, Jalilzadeh S, Perz S, et al. Common variants in myocardial ion channel genes modify the QT interval in the general population: results from the KORA study. Circ Res. 2005;96:693–701. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000161077.53751.e6.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.0000161077.53751.e6) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15746444/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circ%20Res&title=Common%20variants%20in%20myocardial%20ion%20channel%20genes%20modify%20the%20QT%20interval%20in%20the%20general%20population:%20results%20from%20the%20KORA%20study&author=A%20Pfeufer&author=S%20Jalilzadeh&author=S%20Perz&volume=96&publication_year=2005&pages=693-701&pmid=15746444&doi=10.1161/01.RES.0000161077.53751.e6&)

14. Arking DE, Pfeufer A, Post W, et al. A common genetic variant in the NOS1 regulator NOS1AP modulates cardiac repolarization. Nat Genet. 2006;38:644–51. doi: 10.1038/ng1790.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1790) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16648850/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=A%20common%20genetic%20variant%20in%20the%20NOS1%20regulator%20NOS1AP%20modulates%20cardiac%20repolarization&author=DE%20Arking&author=A%20Pfeufer&author=W%20Post&volume=38&publication_year=2006&pages=644-51&pmid=16648850&doi=10.1038/ng1790&)

15. Aarnoudse AJ, Newton-Cheh C, de Bakker PI, et al. Common NOS1AP variants are associated with a prolonged QTc interval in the Rotterdam Study. Circulation. 2007;116:10–6. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.676783.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.676783) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17576865/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Common%20NOS1AP%20variants%20are%20associated%20with%20a%20prolonged%20QTc%20interval%20in%20the%20Rotterdam%20Study&author=AJ%20Aarnoudse&author=C%20Newton-Cheh&author=PI%20de%20Bakker&volume=116&publication_year=2007&pages=10-6&pmid=17576865&doi=10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.676783&)

16. Aromaa AKS, editor. Publications of the National Public Health Institute B12/2004 Helsinki 2004. 2004. Health and functional capacity in Finland. Baseline Results of the Health 2000 Health Examination Survey.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Publications%20of%20the%20National%20Public%20Health%20Institute%20B12/2004%20Helsinki%202004&publication_year=2004&)

17. Fodstad H, Swan H, Laitinen P, et al. Four potassium channel mutations account for 73% of the genetic spectrum underlying long-QT syndrome (LQTS) and provide evidence for a strong founder effect in Finland. Ann Med. 2004;36:53–63. doi: 10.1080/17431380410032689.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/17431380410032689) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15176425/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann%20Med&title=Four%20potassium%20channel%20mutations%20account%20for%2073%%20of%20the%20genetic%20spectrum%20underlying%20long-QT%20syndrome%20(LQTS)%20and%20provide%20evidence%20for%20a%20strong%20founder%20effect%20in%20Finland&author=H%20Fodstad&author=H%20Swan&author=P%20Laitinen&volume=36&publication_year=2004&pages=53-63&pmid=15176425&doi=10.1080/17431380410032689&)

18. Oikarinen L, Paavola M, Montonen J, Viitasalo M, Makijarvi M, Toivonen L, Katila T. Magnetocardiographic QT interval dispersion in postmyocardial infarction patients with sustained ventricular tachycardia: validation of automated QT measurements. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 1998;21:1934–42. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-8159.1998.tb00013.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-8159.1998.tb00013.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9793090/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pacing%20Clin%20Electrophysiol&title=Magnetocardiographic%20QT%20interval%20dispersion%20in%20postmyocardial%20infarction%20patients%20with%20sustained%20ventricular%20tachycardia:%20validation%20of%20automated%20QT%20measurements&author=L%20Oikarinen&author=M%20Paavola&author=J%20Montonen&author=M%20Viitasalo&author=M%20Makijarvi&volume=21&publication_year=1998&pages=1934-42&pmid=9793090&doi=10.1111/j.1540-8159.1998.tb00013.x&)

19. Porthan K, Virolainen J, Hiltunen TP, et al. Relationship of electrocardiographic repolarization measures to echocardiographic left ventricular mass in men with hypertension. J Hypertens. 2007;25:1951–7. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e328263088b.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/HJH.0b013e328263088b) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17762661/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Hypertens&title=Relationship%20of%20electrocardiographic%20repolarization%20measures%20to%20echocardiographic%20left%20ventricular%20mass%20in%20men%20with%20hypertension&author=K%20Porthan&author=J%20Virolainen&author=TP%20Hiltunen&volume=25&publication_year=2007&pages=1951-7&pmid=17762661&doi=10.1097/HJH.0b013e328263088b&)

20. Karjalainen J, Viitasalo M, Manttari M, Manninen V. Relation between QT intervals and heart rates from 40 to 120 beats/min in rest electrocardiograms of men and a simple method to adjust QT interval values. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1994;23:1547–53. doi: 10.1016/0735-1097(94)90654-8.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0735-1097(94)90654-8) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8195512/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Am%20Coll%20Cardiol&title=Relation%20between%20QT%20intervals%20and%20heart%20rates%20from%2040%20to%20120%20beats/min%20in%20rest%20electrocardiograms%20of%20men%20and%20a%20simple%20method%20to%20adjust%20QT%20interval%20values&author=J%20Karjalainen&author=M%20Viitasalo&author=M%20Manttari&author=V%20Manninen&volume=23&publication_year=1994&pages=1547-53&pmid=8195512&doi=10.1016/0735-1097(94)90654-8&)

21. Sokolow M, Freidlander RD. The normal unipolar precordial and limb lead electrocardiogram. Am Heart J. 1949;38:665–87. doi: 10.1016/0002-8703(49)90525-6.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0002-8703(49)90525-6) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15393742/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20Heart%20J&title=The%20normal%20unipolar%20precordial%20and%20limb%20lead%20electrocardiogram&author=M%20Sokolow&author=RD%20Freidlander&volume=38&publication_year=1949&pages=665-87&pmid=15393742&doi=10.1016/0002-8703(49)90525-6&)

22. Molloy TJ, Okin PM, Devereux RB, Kligfield P. Electrocardiographic detection of left ventricular hypertrophy by the simple QRS voltage-duration product. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1992;20:1180–6. doi: 10.1016/0735-1097(92)90376-x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0735-1097(92)90376-x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1401620/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Am%20Coll%20Cardiol&title=Electrocardiographic%20detection%20of%20left%20ventricular%20hypertrophy%20by%20the%20simple%20QRS%20voltage-duration%20product&author=TJ%20Molloy&author=PM%20Okin&author=RB%20Devereux&author=P%20Kligfield&volume=20&publication_year=1992&pages=1180-6&pmid=1401620&doi=10.1016/0735-1097(92)90376-x&)

23. Locati EH, Zareba W, Moss AJ, et al. Age- and sex-related differences in clinical manifestations in patients with congenital long-QT syndrome: findings from the International LQTS Registry. Circulation. 1998;97:2237–44. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.97.22.2237.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.97.22.2237) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9631873/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Age-%20and%20sex-related%20differences%20in%20clinical%20manifestations%20in%20patients%20with%20congenital%20long-QT%20syndrome:%20findings%20from%20the%20International%20LQTS%20Registry&author=EH%20Locati&author=W%20Zareba&author=AJ%20Moss&volume=97&publication_year=1998&pages=2237-44&pmid=9631873&doi=10.1161/01.cir.97.22.2237&)

24. Susmano A. Effect of heart rate and autonomic tone on the QT interval. Circulation. 1982;66:478.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7094254/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Effect%20of%20heart%20rate%20and%20autonomic%20tone%20on%20the%20QT%20interval&author=A%20Susmano&volume=66&publication_year=1982&pages=478&pmid=7094254&)

25. Bonferroni CE. Teoria statistica delle classi e calcolo delle probabilità. Pubblicazioni del R Istituto Superiore di Scienze Economiche e Commerciali di Firenze. 1936;8:3–62.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pubblicazioni%20del%20R%20Istituto%20Superiore%20di%20Scienze%20Economiche%20e%20Commerciali%20di%20Firenze&title=Teoria%20statistica%20delle%20classi%20e%20calcolo%20delle%20probabilit%C3%A0&author=CE%20Bonferroni&volume=8&publication_year=1936&pages=3-62&)

26. Tesson F, Donger C, Denjoy I, et al. Exclusion of KCNE1 (IsK) as a candidate gene for Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 1996;28:2051–5. doi: 10.1006/jmcc.1996.0198.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1006/jmcc.1996.0198) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8899564/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Mol%20Cell%20Cardiol&title=Exclusion%20of%20KCNE1%20(IsK)%20as%20a%20candidate%20gene%20for%20Jervell%20and%20Lange-Nielsen%20syndrome&author=F%20Tesson&author=C%20Donger&author=I%20Denjoy&volume=28&publication_year=1996&pages=2051-5&pmid=8899564&doi=10.1006/jmcc.1996.0198&)

27. Paulussen AD, Gilissen RA, Armstrong M, et al. Genetic variations of KCNQ1, KCNH2, SCN5A, KCNE1, and KCNE2 in drug-induced long QT syndrome patients. J Mol Med. 2004;82:182–8. doi: 10.1007/s00109-003-0522-z. Epub 2004 Feb 4.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00109-003-0522-z) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14760488/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Mol%20Med&title=Genetic%20variations%20of%20KCNQ1,%20KCNH2,%20SCN5A,%20KCNE1,%20and%20KCNE2%20in%20drug-induced%20long%20QT%20syndrome%20patients&author=AD%20Paulussen&author=RA%20Gilissen&author=M%20Armstrong&volume=82&publication_year=2004&pages=182-8&pmid=14760488&doi=10.1007/s00109-003-0522-z&)

28. Mank-Seymour AR, Richmond JL, Wood LS, et al. Association of torsades de pointes with novel and known single nucleotide polymorphisms in long QT syndrome genes. Am Heart J. 2006;152:1116–22. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2006.08.020.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ahj.2006.08.020) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17161064/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20Heart%20J&title=Association%20of%20torsades%20de%20pointes%20with%20novel%20and%20known%20single%20nucleotide%20polymorphisms%20in%20long%20QT%20syndrome%20genes&author=AR%20Mank-Seymour&author=JL%20Richmond&author=LS%20Wood&volume=152&publication_year=2006&pages=1116-22&pmid=17161064&doi=10.1016/j.ahj.2006.08.020&)

29. Wei JYI, Tapper AR, Murray KT, Viswanathan P, Rudy Y, Bennett PB, Norris K, Balser JR, Roden DM, George AL. KCNE1 polymorphism confers risk of drug-induced long QT syndrome by altering kinetic properties of I-Ks potassium channels. Circulation. 1999;100 Abstract 495.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=KCNE1%20polymorphism%20confers%20risk%20of%20drug-induced%20long%20QT%20syndrome%20by%20altering%20kinetic%20properties%20of%20I-Ks%20potassium%20channels&author=JYI%20Wei&author=AR%20Tapper&author=KT%20Murray&author=P%20Viswanathan&author=Y%20Rudy&volume=100&publication_year=1999&)

30. Salisbury BAJR, Pungliya M, Carr J, Qi M, Zareba W, Robinson J, Moss A, Will M, Tester D, Ackerman M. The single nucleotide polymorphism D85N-KCNE1 is associated with both congenital and drug-induced Long QT. Heart Rhythm. 2006;3 Abstract AB47-4.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Heart%20Rhythm&title=The%20single%20nucleotide%20polymorphism%20D85N-KCNE1%20is%20associated%20with%20both%20congenital%20and%20drug-induced%20Long%20QT&author=BAJR%20Salisbury&author=M%20Pungliya&author=J%20Carr&author=M%20Qi&author=W%20Zareba&volume=3&publication_year=2006&)

31. Westenskow P, Splawski I, Timothy KW, Keating MT, Sanguinetti MC. Compound mutations: a common cause of severe long-QT syndrome. Circulation. 2004;109:1834–41. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000125524.34234.13.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.0000125524.34234.13) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15051636/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Compound%20mutations:%20a%20common%20cause%20of%20severe%20long-QT%20syndrome&author=P%20Westenskow&author=I%20Splawski&author=KW%20Timothy&author=MT%20Keating&author=MC%20Sanguinetti&volume=109&publication_year=2004&pages=1834-41&pmid=15051636&doi=10.1161/01.CIR.0000125524.34234.13&)

32. Salisbury BPM, Harris-Kerr C, Judson R, Tester D, Will M, Ackerman M. Distinguishing causative and non-causative mutations in long QT syndrome. Heart Rhythm. 2006;3 Abstract S134-S.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Heart%20Rhythm&title=Distinguishing%20causative%20and%20non-causative%20mutations%20in%20long%20QT%20syndrome&author=BPM%20Salisbury&author=C%20Harris-Kerr&author=R%20Judson&author=D%20Tester&author=M%20Will&volume=3&publication_year=2006&)

33. Roden DM. Long QT syndrome: reduced repolarization reserve and the genetic link. J Intern Med. 2006;259:59–69. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2005.01589.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2796.2005.01589.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16336514/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Intern%20Med&title=Long%20QT%20syndrome:%20reduced%20repolarization%20reserve%20and%20the%20genetic%20link&author=DM%20Roden&volume=259&publication_year=2006&pages=59-69&pmid=16336514&doi=10.1111/j.1365-2796.2005.01589.x&)

34. Napolitano CSP, Brown AM, Ronchetti E, Bianchi S, Pinnavaia A, Acquaro G, Priori SG. Evidence for a cardiac ion channel mutation underlying drug-induced QT prolongation and life-threatening arrhythmias. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2000;11:691–6. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-8167.2000.tb00033.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-8167.2000.tb00033.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10868744/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Cardiovasc%20Electrophysiol&title=Evidence%20for%20a%20cardiac%20ion%20channel%20mutation%20underlying%20drug-induced%20QT%20prolongation%20and%20life-threatening%20arrhythmias&author=CSP%20Napolitano&author=AM%20Brown&author=E%20Ronchetti&author=S%20Bianchi&author=A%20Pinnavaia&volume=11&publication_year=2000&pages=691-6&pmid=10868744&doi=10.1111/j.1540-8167.2000.tb00033.x&)

35. Laitinen P, Fodstad H, Piippo K, et al. Survey of the coding region of the HERG gene in long QT syndrome reveals six novel mutations and an amino acid polymorphism with possible phenotypic effects. Hum Mutat. 2000;15:580–1. doi: 10.1002/1098-1004(200006)15:6<580::AID-HUMU16>3.0.CO;2-0.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/1098-1004(200006)15:6<580::AID-HUMU16>3.0.CO;2-0) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10862094/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hum%20Mutat&title=Survey%20of%20the%20coding%20region%20of%20the%20HERG%20gene%20in%20long%20QT%20syndrome%20reveals%20six%20novel%20mutations%20and%20an%20amino%20acid%20polymorphism%20with%20possible%20phenotypic%20effects&author=P%20Laitinen&author=H%20Fodstad&author=K%20Piippo&volume=15&publication_year=2000&pages=580-1&pmid=10862094&doi=10.1002/1098-1004(200006)15:6<580::AID-HUMU16>3.0.CO;2-0&)

36. Bezzina CR, Verkerk AO, Busjahn A, et al. A common polymorphism in KCNH2 (HERG) hastens cardiac repolarization. Cardiovasc Res. 2003;59:27–36. doi: 10.1016/s0008-6363(03)00342-0.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0008-6363(03)00342-0) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12829173/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cardiovasc%20Res&title=A%20common%20polymorphism%20in%20KCNH2%20(HERG)%20hastens%20cardiac%20repolarization&author=CR%20Bezzina&author=AO%20Verkerk&author=A%20Busjahn&volume=59&publication_year=2003&pages=27-36&pmid=12829173&doi=10.1016/s0008-6363(03)00342-0&)

37. Pietila E, Fodstad H, Niskasaari E, et al. Association between HERG K897T polymorphism and QT interval in middle-aged Finnish women. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;40:511–4. doi: 10.1016/s0735-1097(02)01979-4.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0735-1097(02)01979-4) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12142119/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Am%20Coll%20Cardiol&title=Association%20between%20HERG%20K897T%20polymorphism%20and%20QT%20interval%20in%20middle-aged%20Finnish%20women&author=E%20Pietila&author=H%20Fodstad&author=E%20Niskasaari&volume=40&publication_year=2002&pages=511-4&pmid=12142119&doi=10.1016/s0735-1097(02)01979-4&)

38. Paavonen KJ, Chapman H, Laitinen PJ, et al. Functional characterization of the common amino acid 897 polymorphism of the cardiac potassium channel KCNH2 (HERG) Cardiovasc Res. 2003;59:603–11. doi: 10.1016/s0008-6363(03)00458-9.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0008-6363(03)00458-9) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14499861/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cardiovasc%20Res&title=Functional%20characterization%20of%20the%20common%20amino%20acid%20897%20polymorphism%20of%20the%20cardiac%20potassium%20channel%20KCNH2%20(HERG)&author=KJ%20Paavonen&author=H%20Chapman&author=PJ%20Laitinen&volume=59&publication_year=2003&pages=603-11&pmid=14499861&doi=10.1016/s0008-6363(03)00458-9&)

39. Anson BD, Ackerman MJ, Tester DJ, Will ML, Delisle BP, Anderson CL, January CT. Molecular and functional characterization of common polymorphisms in HERG (KCNH2) potassium channels. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2004;286:H2434–41. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00891.2003.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00891.2003) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14975928/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Physiol%20Heart%20Circ%20Physiol&title=Molecular%20and%20functional%20characterization%20of%20common%20polymorphisms%20in%20HERG%20(KCNH2)%20potassium%20channels&author=BD%20Anson&author=MJ%20Ackerman&author=DJ%20Tester&author=ML%20Will&author=BP%20Delisle&volume=286&publication_year=2004&pages=H2434-41&pmid=14975928&doi=10.1152/ajpheart.00891.2003&)

40. Crotti L, Lundquist AL, Insolia R, et al. KCNH2-K897T is a genetic modifier of latent congenital long-QT syndrome. Circulation. 2005;112:1251–8. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.549071.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.549071) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16116052/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=KCNH2-K897T%20is%20a%20genetic%20modifier%20of%20latent%20congenital%20long-QT%20syndrome&author=L%20Crotti&author=AL%20Lundquist&author=R%20Insolia&volume=112&publication_year=2005&pages=1251-8&pmid=16116052&doi=10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.549071&)

41. Post W, Shen H, Damcott C, et al. Associations between genetic variants in the NOS1AP (CAPON) gene and cardiac repolarization in the old order Amish. Hum Hered. 2007;64:214–9. doi: 10.1159/000103630.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1159/000103630) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2880727/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17565224/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hum%20Hered&title=Associations%20between%20genetic%20variants%20in%20the%20NOS1AP%20(CAPON)%20gene%20and%20cardiac%20repolarization%20in%20the%20old%20order%20Amish&author=W%20Post&author=H%20Shen&author=C%20Damcott&volume=64&publication_year=2007&pages=214-9&pmid=17565224&doi=10.1159/000103630&)

42. Iwasa H, Itoh T, Nagai R, Nakamura Y, Tanaka T. Twenty single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and their allelic frequencies in four genes that are responsible for familial long QT syndrome in the Japanese population. J Hum Genet. 2000;45:182–3. doi: 10.1007/s100380050207.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s100380050207) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10807545/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Hum%20Genet&title=Twenty%20single%20nucleotide%20polymorphisms%20(SNPs)%20and%20their%20allelic%20frequencies%20in%20four%20genes%20that%20are%20responsible%20for%20familial%20long%20QT%20syndrome%20in%20the%20Japanese%20population&author=H%20Iwasa&author=T%20Itoh&author=R%20Nagai&author=Y%20Nakamura&author=T%20Tanaka&volume=45&publication_year=2000&pages=182-3&pmid=10807545&doi=10.1007/s100380050207&)

43. Chen LY, Ballew JD, Herron KJ, Rodeheffer RJ, Olson TM. A common polymorphism in SCN5A is associated with lone atrial fibrillation. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2007;81:35–41. doi: 10.1038/sj.clpt.6100016.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.clpt.6100016) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1933493/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17185997/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Pharmacol%20Ther&title=A%20common%20polymorphism%20in%20SCN5A%20is%20associated%20with%20lone%20atrial%20fibrillation&author=LY%20Chen&author=JD%20Ballew&author=KJ%20Herron&author=RJ%20Rodeheffer&author=TM%20Olson&volume=81&publication_year=2007&pages=35-41&pmid=17185997&doi=10.1038/sj.clpt.6100016&)

44. Poelzing S, Forleo C, Samodell M, et al. SCN5A polymorphism restores trafficking of a Brugada syndrome mutation on a separate gene. Circulation. 2006;114:368–76. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.601294.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.601294) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16864729/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=SCN5A%20polymorphism%20restores%20trafficking%20of%20a%20Brugada%20syndrome%20mutation%20on%20a%20separate%20gene&author=S%20Poelzing&author=C%20Forleo&author=M%20Samodell&volume=114&publication_year=2006&pages=368-76&pmid=16864729&doi=10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.601294&)

45. Aydin A, Bahring S, Dahm S, Guenther UP, Uhlmann R, Busjahn A, Luft FC. Single nucleotide polymorphism map of five long-QT genes. J Mol Med. 2005;83:159–65. doi: 10.1007/s00109-004-0595-3.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00109-004-0595-3) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15599693/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Mol%20Med&title=Single%20nucleotide%20polymorphism%20map%20of%20five%20long-QT%20genes&author=A%20Aydin&author=S%20Bahring&author=S%20Dahm&author=UP%20Guenther&author=R%20Uhlmann&volume=83&publication_year=2005&pages=159-65&pmid=15599693&doi=10.1007/s00109-004-0595-3&)

46. Larsen LA, Andersen PS, Kanters J, et al. Screening for mutations and polymorphisms in the genes KCNH2 and KCNE2 encoding the cardiac HERG/MiRP1 ion channel: implications for acquired and congenital long Q-T syndrome. Clin Chem. 2001;47:1390–5.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11468227/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Chem&title=Screening%20for%20mutations%20and%20polymorphisms%20in%20the%20genes%20KCNH2%20and%20KCNE2%20encoding%20the%20cardiac%20HERG/MiRP1%20ion%20channel:%20implications%20for%20acquired%20and%20congenital%20long%20Q-T%20syndrome&author=LA%20Larsen&author=PS%20Andersen&author=J%20Kanters&volume=47&publication_year=2001&pages=1390-5&pmid=11468227&)

47. Sun Z, Milos PM, Thompson JF, et al. Role of a KCNH2 polymorphism (R1047 L) in dofetilide-induced Torsades de Pointes. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2004;37:1031–9. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2004.09.001.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yjmcc.2004.09.001) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15522280/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Mol%20Cell%20Cardiol&title=Role%20of%20a%20KCNH2%20polymorphism%20(R1047%20L)%20in%20dofetilide-induced%20Torsades%20de%20Pointes&author=Z%20Sun&author=PM%20Milos&author=JF%20Thompson&volume=37&publication_year=2004&pages=1031-9&pmid=15522280&doi=10.1016/j.yjmcc.2004.09.001&)

48. Paulussen A, Matthijs G, Gewillig M, Verhasselt P, Cohen N, Aerssens J. Mutation analysis in congenital Long QT Syndrome--a case with missense mutations in KCNQ1 and SCN5A. Genet Test. 2003;7:57–61. doi: 10.1089/109065703321560958.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1089/109065703321560958) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12820704/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genet%20Test&title=Mutation%20analysis%20in%20congenital%20Long%20QT%20Syndrome--a%20case%20with%20missense%20mutations%20in%20KCNQ1%20and%20SCN5A&author=A%20Paulussen&author=G%20Matthijs&author=M%20Gewillig&author=P%20Verhasselt&author=N%20Cohen&volume=7&publication_year=2003&pages=57-61&pmid=12820704&doi=10.1089/109065703321560958&)

49. Lai LP, Deng CL, Moss AJ, Kass RS, Liang CS. Polymorphism of the gene encoding a human minimal potassium ion channel (minK) Gene. 1994;151:339–40. doi: 10.1016/0378-1119(94)90685-8.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-1119(94)90685-8) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7828904/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gene&title=Polymorphism%20of%20the%20gene%20encoding%20a%20human%20minimal%20potassium%20ion%20channel%20(minK)&author=LP%20Lai&author=CL%20Deng&author=AJ%20Moss&author=RS%20Kass&author=CS%20Liang&volume=151&publication_year=1994&pages=339-40&pmid=7828904&doi=10.1016/0378-1119(94)90685-8&)

50. Friedlander Y, Vatta M, Sotoodehnia N, et al. Possible association of the human KCNE1 (minK) gene and QT interval in healthy subjects: evidence from association and linkage analyses in Israeli families. Ann Hum Genet. 2005;69:645–56. doi: 10.1046/j.1529-8817.2005.00182.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1529-8817.2005.00182.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16266404/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann%20Hum%20Genet&title=Possible%20association%20of%20the%20human%20KCNE1%20(minK)%20gene%20and%20QT%20interval%20in%20healthy%20subjects:%20evidence%20from%20association%20and%20linkage%20analyses%20in%20Israeli%20families&author=Y%20Friedlander&author=M%20Vatta&author=N%20Sotoodehnia&volume=69&publication_year=2005&pages=645-56&pmid=16266404&doi=10.1046/j.1529-8817.2005.00182.x&)

51. Akyol M, Jalilzadeh S, Sinner MF, et al. The common non-synonymous variant G38S of the KCNE1-(minK)-gene is not associated to QT interval in Central European Caucasians: results from the KORA study. Eur Heart J. 2007;28:305–9. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehl460.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehl460) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17227789/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20Heart%20J&title=The%20common%20non-synonymous%20variant%20G38S%20of%20the%20KCNE1-(minK)-gene%20is%20not%20associated%20to%20QT%20interval%20in%20Central%20European%20Caucasians:%20results%20from%20the%20KORA%20study&author=M%20Akyol&author=S%20Jalilzadeh&author=MF%20Sinner&volume=28&publication_year=2007&pages=305-9&pmid=17227789&doi=10.1093/eurheartj/ehl460&)

52. Abbott GW, Sesti F, Splawski I, et al. MiRP1 forms IKr potassium channels with HERG and is associated with cardiac arrhythmia. Cell. 1999;97:175–87. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80728-x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80728-x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10219239/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell&title=MiRP1%20forms%20IKr%20potassium%20channels%20with%20HERG%20and%20is%20associated%20with%20cardiac%20arrhythmia&author=GW%20Abbott&author=F%20Sesti&author=I%20Splawski&volume=97&publication_year=1999&pages=175-87&pmid=10219239&doi=10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80728-x&)

53. Sesti F, Abbott GW, Wei J, et al. A common polymorphism associated with antibiotic-induced cardiac arrhythmia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000;97:10613–8. doi: 10.1073/pnas.180223197.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.180223197) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC27073/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10984545/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20U%20S%20A&title=A%20common%20polymorphism%20associated%20with%20antibiotic-induced%20cardiac%20arrhythmia&author=F%20Sesti&author=GW%20Abbott&author=J%20Wei&volume=97&publication_year=2000&pages=10613-8&pmid=10984545&doi=10.1073/pnas.180223197&)

54. Roden DM. Drug-induced prolongation of the QT interval. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:1013–22. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra032426.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra032426) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14999113/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N%20Engl%20J%20Med&title=Drug-induced%20prolongation%20of%20the%20QT%20interval&author=DM%20Roden&volume=350&publication_year=2004&pages=1013-22&pmid=14999113&doi=10.1056/NEJMra032426&)

55. Puddu PE, Bourassa MG. Prediction of sudden death from QTc interval prolongation in patients with chronic ischemic heart disease. J Electrocardiol. 1986;19:203–11. doi: 10.1016/s0022-0736(86)80030-9.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-0736(86)80030-9) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3746147/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Electrocardiol&title=Prediction%20of%20sudden%20death%20from%20QTc%20interval%20prolongation%20in%20patients%20with%20chronic%20ischemic%20heart%20disease&author=PE%20Puddu&author=MG%20Bourassa&volume=19&publication_year=1986&pages=203-11&pmid=3746147&doi=10.1016/s0022-0736(86)80030-9&)

56. Karjalainen J, Reunanen A, Ristola P, Viitasalo M. QT interval as a cardiac risk factor in a middle aged population. Heart. 1997;77:543–8. doi: 10.1136/hrt.77.6.543.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/hrt.77.6.543) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC484798/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9227299/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Heart&title=QT%20interval%20as%20a%20cardiac%20risk%20factor%20in%20a%20middle%20aged%20population&author=J%20Karjalainen&author=A%20Reunanen&author=P%20Ristola&author=M%20Viitasalo&volume=77&publication_year=1997&pages=543-8&pmid=9227299&doi=10.1136/hrt.77.6.543&)

57. Algra A, Tijssen JG, Roelandt JR, Pool J, Lubsen J. QTc prolongation measured by standard 12-lead electrocardiography is an independent risk factor for sudden death due to cardiac arrest. Circulation. 1991;83:1888–94. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.83.6.1888.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.83.6.1888) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2040041/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=QTc%20prolongation%20measured%20by%20standard%2012-lead%20electrocardiography%20is%20an%20independent%20risk%20factor%20for%20sudden%20death%20due%20to%20cardiac%20arrest&author=A%20Algra&author=JG%20Tijssen&author=JR%20Roelandt&author=J%20Pool&author=J%20Lubsen&volume=83&publication_year=1991&pages=1888-94&pmid=2040041&doi=10.1161/01.cir.83.6.1888&)

58. De Ponti F, Poluzzi E, Cavalli A, Recanatini M, Montanaro N. Safety of non-antiarrhythmic drugs that prolong the QT interval or induce torsade de pointes: an overview. Drug Saf. 2002;25:263–86. doi: 10.2165/00002018-200225040-00004.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2165/00002018-200225040-00004) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11994029/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Drug%20Saf&title=Safety%20of%20non-antiarrhythmic%20drugs%20that%20prolong%20the%20QT%20interval%20or%20induce%20torsade%20de%20pointes:%20an%20overview&author=F%20De%20Ponti&author=E%20Poluzzi&author=A%20Cavalli&author=M%20Recanatini&author=N%20Montanaro&volume=25&publication_year=2002&pages=263-86&pmid=11994029&doi=10.2165/00002018-200225040-00004&)

59. Bazett H. An analysis of time relations of the electrocardiogram. Heart. 1920;7:353–70.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Heart&title=An%20analysis%20of%20time%20relations%20of%20the%20electrocardiogram&author=H%20Bazett&volume=7&publication_year=1920&pages=353-70&)
