# Characterization of the human cytochrome P450 enzymes involved in the metabolism of dihydrocodeine

## Metadata
**Authors:** L C Kirkwood, R L Nation, A A Somogyi
**Journal:** British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology
**Date:** 1997 Dec
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-2125.1997.t01-1-00626.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2125.1997.t01-1-00626.x)
**PMID:** 9431830
**PMCID:** PMC2042888
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2042888/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2042888/pdf/bcp_0626.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2042888/pdf/bcp_0626.pdf)

## Abstract

Aims Using human liver microsomes from donors of the CYP2D6 poor and extensive metabolizer genotypes, the role of individual cytochromes P-450 in the oxidative metabolism of dihydrocodeine was investigated.

Methods The kinetics of formation of N- and O-demethylated metabolites, nordihydrocodeine and dihydromorphine, were determined using microsomes from six extensive and one poor metabolizer and the effects of chemical inhibitors selective for individual P-450 enzymes of the 1A, 2A, 2C, 2D, 2E and 3A families and of LKM1 (anti-CYP2D6) antibodies were studied.

Results Nordihydrocodeine was the major metabolite in both poor and extensive metabolizers. Kinetic constants for N-demethylation derived from the single enzyme Michaelis-Menten model did not differ between the two groups. Troleandomycin and erythromycin selectively inhibited N-demethylation in both extensive and poor metabolizers. The CYP3A inducer, α-naphthoflavone, increased N-demethylation rates. The kinetics of formation of dihydromorphine in both groups were best described by a single enzyme Michaelis-Menten model although inhibition studies in extensive metabolizers suggested involvement of two enzymes with similar Km values. The kinetic constants for O-demethylation were significantly different in extensive and poor metabolizers. The extensive metabolizers had a mean intrinsic clearance to dihydromorphine more than ten times greater than the poor metabolizer. The CYP2D6 chemical inhibitors, quinidine and quinine, and LKM1 antibodies inhibited O-demethylation in extensive metabolizers; no effect was observed in microsomes from a poor metabolizer.

Conclusions CYP2D6 is the major enzyme mediating O-demethylation of dihydrocodeine to dihydromorphine. In contrast, nordihydrocodeine formation is predominantly catalysed by CYP3A.

Keywords: dihydrocodeine, metabolism, human liver microsomes, CYP2D6, CYP3A

## Full Text

The Full Text of this article is available as a [PDF](/articles/instance/2042888/pdf/bcp_0626.pdf) (131.9 KB).
