# Homogeneous Assay of rs4343, an ACE I/D Proxy, and an Analysis in the British Women’s Heart and Health Study (BWHHS)

## Metadata
**Authors:** Mohammad Reza Abdollahi, Shuwen Huang, Santiago Rodriguez, Philip Alexander Isles Guthrie, George Davey Smith, Shah Ebrahim, Debbie A Lawlor, Ian N M Day, Tom R Gaunt
**Journal:** Disease markers
**Date:** 2007 Nov 26
**DOI:** [10.1155/2008/813679](https://doi.org/10.1155/2008/813679)
**PMID:** 18057531
**PMCID:** PMC3850618
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3850618/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3850618/pdf/DM24-01-813679.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3850618/pdf/DM24-01-813679.pdf)

## Abstract

Current literature suggests that ACE SNP rs4343, ACE 2350A>G in exon 17, T202T, may be the best proxy for the ACE Alu I/D whereas rs4363 and rs4362 may be slightly stronger predictors of ACE levels. Considering reported difficulties in genotyping ACE I/D and stronger associations of rs4343 than ACE I/D with plasma ACE levels in Africans, and suitability of rs4343 for allelic mRNA (cDNA) studies, we developed and validated a liquid phase assay for rs4343, which has advantage on both functional and technical grounds. We confirmed that rs4343, is in near perfect linkage disequilibrium (D’=1, r2 =0.88, n=64) with ACE I/D in Europeans (A and G alleles of rs4343 marking insertion and deletion alleles of ACE I/D respectively).

We then studied its association with metabolic and cardiovascular traits in 3253 British women (60–79 years old).

Apart from a nominal trend of association with diastolic blood pressure (p anova=0.08; p trend=0.05), no other associations were observed. A post-hoc vascular and general phenome scan revealed no further associations.

We conclude that ACE I/D is not a major determinant of metabolic and cardiovascular traits in this population. Liquid phase genotyping of SNP rs4343 may be preferable to gel based ACE I/D genotyping both for technical and functional reasons.

Keywords: Angiotensin converting enzyme, insertion deletion polymorphism, metabolic syndrome trait, Alu element, single nucleotide polymorphism

## Full Text

The Full Text of this article is available as a [PDF](/articles/instance/3850618/pdf/DM24-01-813679.pdf) (92.3 KB).
