# Symptomatic response to antiarrhythmic drug therapy is modulated by a common single nucleotide polymorphism in atrial fibrillation

## Metadata
**Authors:** Babar Parvez, Joseph Vaglio, Shane Rowan, Raafia Muhammad, Gayle Kucera, Tanya Stubblefield, Shannon Carter, Dan Roden, Dawood Darbar
**Journal:** Journal of the American College of Cardiology
**Date:** 2012 Jun 20
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacc.2012.01.070](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2012.01.070)
**PMID:** 22726630
**PMCID:** PMC3411889
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3411889/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3411889/pdf/nihms-356379.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3411889/pdf/nihms-356379.pdf)

## Abstract

**Objectives:** 
This study tested the hypothesis that response to antiarrhythmic drugs (AADs) is modulated by 3 common loci associated with atrial fibrillation (AF).

**Background:** 
Recent genome wide association studies (GWAS) have identified 3 loci, on chromosomes 4q25 (near PITX2), 16q22 (in ZFHX3), and 1q21 (in KCNN3), that associate with either typical or lone AF. These findings indicate that variable mechanisms contribute to AF susceptibility, and suggest that response to therapy may be genotype-dependent.

**Methods:** 
We studied 478 and 198 Caucasian patients respectively in the discovery cohort and validation cohort, prospectively enrolled in the Vanderbilt AF Registry. Response was defined prospectively as successful rhythm control if the patient remained on the same AAD therapy for a minimum of 6 months with ≥ 75% reduction in symptomatic AF burden. We also evaluated AF recurrence by 12 lead ECG at 3, 6 and 12 months. Symptomatic patients were also given 24-48-hour Holter monitor or 30-days event recorder when AF recurrence was not captured by 12 lead ECG.

**Results:** 
In the discovery cohort, 399 (83%) were successfully rhythm-controlled. Multiple clinical variables (including age, hypertension, lone AF) failed to significantly predict response to AADs. By contrast single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs10033464 at 4q25 was an independent predictor of successful rhythm control in patients with Typical AF carrying the ancestral allele (wild type) vs. carriers of variant allele (odds ratio [OR] 4.7, [95% confidence interval [CI] 1.83-12, P=0.0013. In the validation cohort, 143 (72%) patients met the criteria for successful rhythm control and rs10033464 was again an independent predictor of successful rhythm control, OR: 1.5, 95% CI: 1.02-3.06, P = 0.04. This SNP (rs10033464) was an independent predictor of AF recurrence in the discovery (39% AF recurrence) and validation cohort (38% AF recurrence); OR: 3.27, 95% CI: 1.7–6, P<0.001 and OR: 4.3, 95% CI: 1.98–9.4, P<0.001 respectively.

**Conclusions:** 
These results suggest that a common SNP on chromosome 4q25 associated with AF modulates response to AAD therapy and points to a potential role for stratification of therapeutic approaches by genotype.

### Objectives

This study tested the hypothesis that response to antiarrhythmic drugs (AADs) is modulated by 3 common loci associated with atrial fibrillation (AF).

### Background

Recent genome wide association studies (GWAS) have identified 3 loci, on chromosomes 4q25 (near *PITX2*), 16q22 (in *ZFHX3*), and 1q21 (in *KCNN3*), that associate with either typical or lone AF. These findings indicate that variable mechanisms contribute to AF susceptibility, and suggest that response to therapy may be genotype-dependent.

### Methods

We studied 478 and 198 Caucasian patients respectively in the discovery cohort and validation cohort, prospectively enrolled in the Vanderbilt AF Registry. Response was defined prospectively as successful rhythm control if the patient remained on the same AAD therapy for a minimum of 6 months with ≥ 75% reduction in symptomatic AF burden. We also evaluated AF recurrence by 12 lead ECG at 3, 6 and 12 months. Symptomatic patients were also given 24-48-hour Holter monitor or 30-days event recorder when AF recurrence was not captured by 12 lead ECG.

### Results

In the discovery cohort, 399 (83%) were successfully rhythm-controlled. Multiple clinical variables (including age, hypertension, lone AF) failed to significantly predict response to AADs. By contrast single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs10033464 at 4q25 was an independent predictor of successful rhythm control in patients with Typical AF carrying the ancestral allele (wild type) vs. carriers of variant allele (odds ratio [OR] 4.7, [95% confidence interval [CI] 1.83-12, P=0.0013. In the validation cohort, 143 (72%) patients met the criteria for successful rhythm control and rs10033464 was again an independent predictor of successful rhythm control, OR: 1.5, 95% CI: 1.02-3.06, P = 0.04. This SNP (rs10033464) was an independent predictor of AF recurrence in the discovery (39% AF recurrence) and validation cohort (38% AF recurrence); OR: 3.27, 95% CI: 1.7–6, P<0.001 and OR: 4.3, 95% CI: 1.98–9.4, P<0.001 respectively.

### Conclusions

These results suggest that a common SNP on chromosome 4q25 associated with AF modulates response to AAD therapy and points to a potential role for stratification of therapeutic approaches by genotype.

## Methods

### Study population

The study was performed on prospectively enrolled patients in the Vanderbilt AF registry. Inclusion criteria included age >18 years, documented history of AF with concurrent use of at least 1 conventional AAD. At the time of enrollment a detailed medical and drug history was obtained along with a symptom questionnaire ([20](#R20)). The symptom questionnaire is a modification of the validated University of Toronto AF severity scale ([21](#R21)), is repeated at 3, 6 and 12 months follow-up along with 12 lead ECGs after starting an AAD. In addition, any patient who complained of symptoms consistent with AF not captured by 12 lead ECG were provided with either 24-48 hour Holter monitor or 30-day event recorder. Written informed consents were obtained from all patients under a protocol approved by Vanderbilt University Institutional Review Board.

### Definitions

Arterial hypertension was defined by a history of hypertension and/or the presence of antihypertensive therapy. Criteria for coronary artery disease (CAD) included a history of myocardial infarction (MI) or typical angina, previous bypass surgery or angioplasty, and drug treatment. Congestive heart failure (CHF) was defined by a history of CHF and/or drug treatment for heart failure. Left atrial and left ventricular measurements from the M-mode echocardiograms were made at the time enrollment if a recent echo (< 3 months) was not available in medical records. Echo was read by an experienced physician blinded to the genotype status of the patient. The echocardiograms were evaluated according to the recommendations of the American Society of Echocardiography. Lone AF (LAF) was defined as AF occurring in patient ≤ 65 years of age without hypertension or overt structural heart disease by clinical examination, ECG and echocardiography. AF recurrence was defined as presence of documented AF on 12 lead ECG, Holter monitoring or pacemaker interrogations.

### Response to AAD therapy

This was defined prospectively as successful rhythm control if the patient remained on the same AAD therapy for a minimum of 6 months with ≥75% reduction in symptomatic AF burden (based on the composite score for frequency, duration and severity of symptoms) on AAD therapy ([20](#R20)). Non-response was defined as <75% reduction in symptomatic AF burden score necessitating a change to another AAD or to non-pharmacologic therapy such as atrio-ventricular node ablation and pacemaker implantation. We also evaluated AF recurrence by 12 lead ECG at 3, 6 and 12 month follow-up, Holter monitoring, 30-day event recorder and in some patients (2%) from pacemaker interrogations (pacemakers inserted for sick sinus syndrome).

### Genotyping

Genomic DNA was isolated from whole blood by a commercial kit (Purgene; Gentra Systems, Minneapolis, MN). Genotyping of the 2 4q25 SNPs (rs2200733, rs10033464) was performed using real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR), iPlex single base primer extension and MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry in a 384-well-format (Sequenom, San Diego, CA) as previously described ([22](#R22)). Genotyping at the 16q22 (rs7193343 in *ZFHX3*) and the 1q21 SNP (rs13376333 in *KCNN3*) was performed using TaqMan assays (Applied Biosystems, Inc., Foster City, CA) as previously described ([14](#R14),[16](#R16)) by laboratory personnel who had no knowledge of the response to rhythm control therapy.

### Statistical Analysis

Data are expressed as mean ± SD. Mann-Whitney U test was performed on continuous variables and Chi-square test (*χ*^2^) on discrete variables. Logistic regression analysis was done to determine odds ratio (OR) and adjusted for type of AF (paroxysmal or persistent) and gender using dominant and additive models. Due to expected low numbers of homozygous variants, it was defined *a priori* to include homozygous variants of all SNPs with their respective heterozygous variants. We used similar analysis to test the association between AF recurrence in 12 month and genetic polymorphism. Final dominant model for AF recurrence was adjusted for age, gender, AF type, history of hypertension, coronary artery disease, heart failure, diabetes, use of AADs, left ventricular ejection fraction and left atrial size in the discovery cohort and age, gender, AF type, HTN and use of AADs in the validation cohort.

In dominant model, an identical effect is expected in heterozygous and homozygous variant carriers, whereas in additive model, heterozygous variant carriers have an intermediate effect in relation to the homozygotes. We used Bonferroni correction to correct for multiple testing with even distribution of significance (α) between the four tested SNPs in the discovery cohort, with a two-sided P value < 0.0125 considered statistically significant. For validation cohort (only one SNP tested), a two-sided P value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. All genetic analyses were performed with PLINK.

## RESULTS

Our study population consisted of 478 and 198 Caucasian patients enrolled in the discovery and validation cohort respectively.

### Clinical Characteristics

The clinical characteristics of the study cohorts are summarized in [Table 1](#T1). Discovery cohort consisted of 325 (68%) men, 152 (32%) women, and age (63 ± 13 years), 148 (31%) LAF and HTN was the most underlying comorbidity in 207 (43%) patients. Validation cohort followed a similar trend; 129 (65%) men, 69 (35%) women, and age (63 ± 14 years), 53 (27%) LAF and HTN in 100 (50%) patients. Both study cohorts were similar with respect to baseline demographics except for larger left atrial size (46 ± 8.6 mm) in the discovery cohort vs. validation cohort (44 ± 9 mm), P = 0.005 and marginal difference in left ventricular ejection fraction; 52 ± 14 % in discovery cohort vs. 53 ± 11 % in validation cohort, P = 0.05 in patients with Typical AF.

### Table 1.

| Cohort | Discovery(n = 478) |  | Validation(n = 198) |  | P value # | P value ≈ |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   | Typical | Lone | Typical | Lone |   |   |
| AF type (%) |   |   |   |   | 0.28 | 0.28 |
|   | 69 | 31 | 73 | 27 |   |   |
| Age (year) | 67 ± 10 | 53 ± 13 | 65 ± 11 | 51 ± 14 | 0.07 | 0.3 |
| Age of onset (year) | 54 ± 13 | 39 ± 14 | 55 ± 13 | 40 ± 14 | 0.18 | 0.6 |
| Gender (male %) | 217 (66) | 108 (73) | 94 (65) | 35 (66) | 0.9 | 0.3 |
| Comorbidities |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Hypertension (%) | 207 (43) | 0 (0) | 100 (50) | 0 (0) | 0.11 | - |
| Coronary arterydisease (%) | 102 (21) | 0 (0) | 36 (18) | 0 (0) | 0.25 | - |
| Congestive heartfailure (%) | 66 (14) | 0 (0) | 23 (12) | 0 (0) | 0.39 | - |
| Diabetes mellitus (%) | 65 (14) | 0 (0) | 30 (15) | 0 (0) | 0.85 | - |
| Echocardiographic variables |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Left atrial size (mm) | 46 ± 8.6 | 42 ± 10.5 | 43 ± 8 | 41 ± 6.0 | 0.005 | 0.56 |
| LVEF (%) | 52 ± 14 | 56 ± 9.0 | 53 ± 11 | 56 ± 12 | 0.05 | 0.6 |

Table 1 Caption: Clinical Characteristics of Study cohort

### Genotyping

The frequencies of the common AF variants between responders and non-responders did not deviate significantly from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. [Table 2](#T2) shows the genotype frequencies of the tested SNPs in both study cohorts.

### Table 2.

| SNP | Response | MAF | Wild Type(%) | Minor allele carriers(%) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Discovery cohort |  |  |  |  |
| rs2200733 (4q25)n = 477 | Responders (398) | 16 | 70 | 30 |
| Non-responders (79) | 15 | 71 | 29 |  |
| rs10033464 (4q25)n = 477 | Responders (398) | 11 | 79 | 21 |
| Non-responders (79) | 16 | 68 | 32 |  |
| rs7193343 in(16q22)n = 464 | Responders (386) | 20 | 63 | 37 |
| Non-responders (78) | 21 | 63 | 37 |  |
| rs13376333 in(1q21)n = 466 | Responders (387) | 38 | 39 | 61 |
| Non-responders (79) | 35 | 41 | 59 |  |
| Validation cohort |  |  |  |  |
| rs10033464 (4q25)N = 198 | Responders (143) | 16.7 | 67 | 33 |
| Non-responders (55) | 12 | 71 | 29 |  |

Table 2 Caption: Genotype frequencies in study population.

### Response to AAD therapy

In the discovery cohort, three hundred ninety-nine (83.5%) patients met the criteria of successful rhythm control. Response to therapy (successful rhythm control) was significantly associated with rs10033464 in patients with Typical AF; allelic *χ*^2^ = 0.0026, genotypic *χ*^2^ = 0.0008. There was marginal genotypic association of the same SNP in the cumulative discovery cohort (Typical and Lone AF); *χ*^2^ = 0.03.

Multiple clinical variables (including age, hypertension, lone AF) failed to significantly predict response to AADs. By contrast rs10033464 at 4q25 in regression analysis under both dominant and additive models was significantly associated with successful rhythm control in patients with Typical AF carrying the ancestral allele (wild type) vs. carriers of variant allele (odds ratio [OR] 4.59, [95% confidence interval [CI] 1.82-11.5, P=0.0012 and OR: 3.03, 95% CI: 1.41-6.50, P=0.004 respectively). This association persisted after correction for multiple clinical factors (OR: 4.70, 95% CI: 1.83-12.0, P=0.0013 and OR: 3.44, 95% CI: 1.52-7.76, P=0.003 respectively) ([Table 3](#T3)).

### Table 3.

|   | Discovery Cohort |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   | Unadjusted |  |  | Adjusted |  |  |
| SNP | OR | 95% CI | P value | OR | 95% CI | P value |
| rs2200733 additive |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| All AF | 0.91 | 0.57-1.45 | 0.69 | 0.91 | 0.57-1.45 | 0.68 |
| Typical | 0.98 | 0.42-2.33 | 0.97 | 0.94 | 0.39-2.29 | 0.89 |
| Lone | 0.67 | 0.36-1.27 | 0.22 | 0.66 | 0.35-1.27 | 0.21 |
| rs2200733 dominant |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| All AF | 0.99 | 0.58-1.68 | 0.95 | 0.98 | 0.57-1.67 | 0.93 |
| Typical | 0.89 | 0.31-2.53 | 0.83 | 0.82 | 0.28-2.37 | 0.71 |
| Lone | 0.75 | 0.37-1.50 | 0.41 | 0.75 | 0.36-1.53 | 0.42 |
| rs10033464 additive |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| All AF | 1.49 | 0.91-2.4 | 0.11 | 1.48 | 0.91-2.42 | 0.11 |
| Typical | 3.03† | 1.41-6.50 | 0.004 | 3.44† | 1.52-7.76 | 0.003 |
| Lone | 1.07 | .050-2.26 | 0.86 | 1.01 | 0.47-2.19 | 0.97 |
| rs10033464 dominant |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| All AF | 1.73 | 1.02-2.95 | 0.04 | 1.74 | 1.02-2.97 | 0.04 |
| Typical | 4.59† | 1.82-11.5 | 0.0012 | 4.70† | 1.83-12.0 | 0.0013 |
| Lone | 1.15 | 0.52-2.51 | 0.73 | 1.10 | 0.49-2.45 | 0.82 |
| rs7193343 additive |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| All AF | 1.07 | 0.69-1.66 | 0.75 | 1.08 | 0.69-1.66 | 0.75 |
| Typical | 1.14 | 0.49-2.67 | 0.77 | 1.11 | 0.46-2.67 | 0.80 |
| Lone | 0.90 | 0.52-1.57 | 0.71 | 0.92 | 0.52-1.61 | 0.76 |
| rs7193343 dominant |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| All AF | 0.99 | 0.60-1.65 | 0.98 | 0.99 | 0.62-1.65 | 0.98 |
| Typical | 0.80 | 0.29-2.16 | 0.65 | 0.75 | 0.27-2.06 | 0.58 |
| Lone | 0.99 | 0.50-1.94 | 0.96 | 1.10 | 0.52-2.00 | 0.97 |
| rs13376333 additive |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| All AF | 0.89 | 0.63-1.27 | 0.51 | 0.90 | 0.63-1.28 | 0.55 |
| Typical | 0.59 | 0.29-1.20 | 0.14 | 0.60 | 0.29-2.23 | 0.16 |
| Lone | 0.87 | 0.53-1.42 | 0.57 | 0.90 | 0.55-1.49 | 0.68 |
| rs13376333 dominant |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| All AF | 0.89 | 0.55-1.46 | 0.64 | 0.91 | 0.55-1.49 | 0.70 |
| Typical | 0.58 | 0.23-1.45 | 0.25 | 0.61 | 0.24-1.53 | 0.29 |
| Validation Cohort |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| rs10033464 additive |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| All AF | 1.318 | 0.62-2.79 | 0.46 | 1.317 | 0.72-2.79 | 0.47 |
| rs10033464 dominant |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| All AF | 1.496† | 1.02-3.06 | 0.04 | 1.498† | 1.02-3.06 | 0.04 |

Table 3 Caption: Logistic regression analysis of genetic predictors of response to antiarrhythmic drugs.

There was a differential response to the class of AADs in variants of rs10033464. Wild types responded better to Class III AADs, P=0.02, whereas carriers of variant allele responded better to Class I AADs, P=0.02 ([Table 4](#T4)).

### Table 4.

| Discovery Cohort |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Drug class | Wild type(n = 309) | Minor allele carriers(n = 90) | P value |
| Class 1 | 87 (28%) | 37 (41%) | 0.02 |
| Class III | 222 (72%) | 53 (59%) | 0.02 |
| Validation Cohort |  |  |  |
| Drug class | Wild type(n = 97 ) | Minor allele carriers(n = 46) | P value |
| Class 1 | 37 (39%) | 30 (67%) | 0.01 |
| Class III | 60 (61%) | 16 (34%) | 0.02 |

Table 4 Caption: Response (%) distribution of antiarrhythmic drugs by Class among Responders for SNP rs10033464.

In the validation cohort, one hundred and forty-three (72%) patients met the criteria for rhythm control. Response to therapy was again significantly associated with rs10033464; *χ*^2^ = 0.042. In similar genetic regression models as the discovery cohort, polymorphism at rs10033464 was a significant predictor of successful rhythm control in wild type; dominant model OR: 1.496, 95% CI: 1.02-3.06, P = 0.04. In additive model, we observed a similar trend as in the discovery cohort, however it did not reach statistical significance; OR: 1.318, 95% CI: 0.62-2.79, P = 0.46 ([Table 3](#T3)).

Response to AADs in the validation cohort, followed the same trend as the discovery cohort with wild types responding favorably to Class III AAD (61% vs. 34%, P = 0.02) vs. carriers of variant allele atrs10033464 responding favorably to Class I AADs (39% vs. 67%, P = 0.01) ([Table 4](#T4)).

### AF recurrence and genetic polymorphism

In 12 month follow-up, 184 (39%) patients had AF recurrence in the discovery cohort (n=478), of which 57 (12% of 478) patients had AF captured by Holter or Event monitor and 10 (2% of 478) patients had AF captured by pacemaker interrogations. In the validation cohort (n=198), 73 (38%) patients had AF recurrence, of which 20 (10% of 198) patients had AF captured by Holter or Event monitor. AF recurrence among carriers of the variant allele and wild type for each SNP in each cohort is shown in [Table 5](#T5).

### Table 5.

| SNP | Carriers of Variant allele | Wild type | P value* |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Discovery cohort |  |  |  |
| rs2200733 | 60/139 (43%) | 123/334 (37%) | 0.19 |
| rs10033464 | 50/108 (46%) | 133/365 (36%) | 0.06 |
| rs7193343 | 67/173 (37%) | 114/287 (40%) | 0.83 |
| rs13376333 | 113/279 (40%) | 68/183 (37%) | 0.47 |
| Validation cohort |  |  |  |
| rs10033464 | 30/59 (51%) | 43/134 (32%) | 0.013 |

Table 5 Caption: Distribution of Atrial fibrillation recurrence by genotype.

In both cohorts under univariate analysis, only rs10033464 showed significance associated with AF recurrence. Carriers of the variant allele at rs10033464 had greater AF recurrence compared to wild types; 46% vs. 36%, P = 0.06 in the discovery cohort and 51% vs. 32%, P = 0.013 in the validation cohort. In multivariable dominant adjusted model, carriers of the variant allele at rs10033464 had greater OR of AF recurrence; OR: 3.27, 95% CI: 1.77 – 6.04, P < 0.001 in the discovery cohort and OR: 4.31, 95% CI: 1.98 – 9.4, P < 0.001 in the validation cohort ([Table 6](#T6)).

### Table 6.

| SNP | OR | 95% CI | P value |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Discovery cohort |  |  |  |
| rs2200733 | 1.26 | 0.7 – 2.14 | 0.4 |
| rs10033464 | 3.27 | 1.77 – 6.04 | < 0.001 |
| rs7193343 | 0.8 | 0.4 – 1.33 | 0.4 |
| rs13376333 | 1.1 | 0.6 – 1.8 | 0.7 |
| Validation cohort |  |  |  |
| rs10033464 | 4.31 | 1.98 – 9.4 | < 0.001 |

Table 6 Caption: Multivariable logistic regression analysis for genetic predictors of Atrial fibrillation recurrence.

## DISCUSSION

This study demonstrates a pharmacogenomics interaction; significant modulation of symptomatic AF burden and AF recurrence between a common SNP on chromosome 4q25 (rs10033464) and response to AAD therapy in patients with AF. It further provides evidence for an important role of genetic polymorphisms not only in the pathophysiology of AF but also response to pharmacologic therapy.

The potential mechanism of action of variants at the chromosome 4q25 locus tagged by the two non-coding SNPs is unknown, and may be mediated through effects of distant genes. However, it is interesting that the closest gene, located approximately 90 kb centromeric, is the paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 2 (*PITX2*) with an isoform implicated in early cardiac development ([23](#R23)-[25](#R25)). Mouse *pitx2* knockouts have demonstrated a critical role for one isoform, *pitx2c* in left-right asymmetry, specifically the development of the left atrium ([25](#R25)). Loss of *pitx2c* leads to right atrial isomerization and a failure to suppress a default pathway for sinus node development of the pulmonary myocardium, or the sleeve of cardiomyocytes extending from the left atrium into the initial portion of the pulmonary vein. Importantly, this area is now recognized as a common source for the ectopic atrial activity necessary for the initiation and propagation of AF ([25](#R25),[26](#R26)). Recently additional novel AF susceptibility alleles in addition to rs2200733 and rs10033464 have been identified on chromosome 4q25. This provides evidence of multiple susceptibility signals at chromosome 4q25 and may help localize regulatory elements at this locus with biological relevance in the pathogenesis of AF. ([27](#R27))

Microarray analysis of *pitx2* null-mutant and control mice hearts revealed up-regulation of *Kcnq1*, a potassium channel gene that has been associated with gain-of-function mutations in familial AF ([8](#R8),[28](#R28)). A recent study by Niels *et al* ([29](#R29)) looked atunequal left-to-right distribution of inward rectifier K^+^ currents in subjects with paroxysmal AF. They found a 2-fold greater basal current in left atria compared to right atria and 2-fold greater protein expression of I_K1_ (Kir2.1) in paroxysmal and chronic AF. Physiologically, a gain-of-function potassium channel mutation would be predicted to respond to higher doses of potassium-channel blocking drugs, which in real life practice has higher probability of patients experiencing deleterious side effects of these drugs and ultimate discontinuation. In our cohorts carriers of rs10033464 variant allele responded better to Class I AADs; 41% vs. 28% in the discovery cohort and 67% vs. 39% in the validation cohort, P < 0.05 suggesting that the 4q25 SNP likely modulates other cardiac ion channels in addition to potassium channels.

In a novel study, Kirchhof *et al* ([30](#R30)) in *Pitx2*^+/-^ mice utilizing expression arrays identified alteration in a number of cellular and molecular pathways in addition to potassium channels, which might explain our findings. Although studies in *Pitx2* null mice have identified increased expression of potassium channel genes (kcna3, kcnk5), the functional consequences are unknown. Chinchilla *et al* ([31](#R31)) recently looked at the electrophysiological defects in atrial specific *Pitx2* deficient mice. Their data shows significantly more depolarized resting membrane potential in *Pitx2* deficient mice (−84 mV vs. −87 mV) as compared to littermate control mice (P < 0.05), suggesting decreased expression and/or function of the channels that generate ionic currents involved in the control of the resting membrane potential, for instance the inward rectifier current (I_k1_). By utilizing quantitative RT-PCR they show severely reduced expression of a number potassium channels genes such as Kcnj2; gain-of-function consequence for both inward and outward Kir2.1 currents. In addition, atrial deletion of Pitx2 lead to down regulation of Scn5a and Scn1b, both of which have been associated with familial cases of AF. This recent data strongly supports our finding that response to AADs may also be modulated by the 4q25 SNPs with the mechanism related to modulation of cardiac ion channel expression in the heart. As there is likely to be differential expression of ion channels in the human heart compared to mice, it is not surprising that there was a differential response to the class of AADs.

*ZFHX3* (zinc finger homebox 3) gene on chromosome 16q22 encodes a transcription factor that was originally identified as a regulator of α-fetoprotein expression ([32](#R32)). *ZFHX3* has been associated with Kawasaki disease, as well as malignancies such as prostate cancer. However, in human cardiac and pulmonary tissue, its expression pattern and mechanism is not fully known ([33](#R33)). Two separate GWAS established an AF susceptibility locus on chromosome 16q22 near *ZFHX3* ([14](#R14),[15](#R15)). More recently, a novel genetic locus on chromosome 1q21 was identified for early onset or lone AF. The SNP (rs13376333) is located in the intronic region of chromosome 1q21 between the first and second exons of the calcium-activated potassium channel gene *KCNN3* ([16](#R16)). The precise mechanism by which it causes AF remains to be determined.

It is also possible that common genetic variants identify AF subtypes with differing drug responses. For example, recognizing that activation of the renin-angiotensin system is implicated in AF one study examined the impact of the common angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) ID polymorphism on response to AAD therapy. An analysis of 213 subjects treated with rhythm control showed that lone AF and DD/ID genotypes were highly significant predictors of failure of drug therapy ([20](#R20)). By contrast, no relationship between common SNPs in the β1-adrenergic receptor (resulting in G389R and S49G) and response to ventricular rate control therapy in a group of 279 patients managed with rate control was identified ([34](#R34)). These findings indicate that variable mechanisms contribute to AF susceptibility, and suggest therefore that response to therapy may also be genotype-dependent.

There are certain limitations to this study that should be acknowledged. Although this was a retrospective analysis, patients were enrolled prospectively and more importantly, response to AAD therapy was defined *a priori* without knowledge of the genotypes. The recessive logistic regression model was not performed due to limited number of homozygous carriers. The sample size for the validation cohort was underpowered to detect allelic effect in the additive genetic model. With a follow-up period of 12 months and our criteria to document AF recurrence by 12 lead ECG at 3, 6 and 12 months, Holter monitoring or 30-day event recorder and in some patients from pacemaker interrogations, we might not have been able to capture asymptomatic AF in all patients. Both study cohorts were similar with respect to baseline demographics but patients with typical AF in the validation cohort had well preserved left ventricular ejection fraction and small left atrial size. Finally, our study looked at both reduction in symptomatic AF burden score as a reflection of successful rhythm control and AF recurrence, with both outcomes showing similar association with the same polymorphism at 4q25, but considering the retrospective nature of our study, a larger prospective randomized study is needed to fully appreciate this difference.

In conclusion, our data support the hypothesis that a common SNP on chromosome 4q25 associated with AF modulates response to AAD therapy and points to a potential role for stratification of therapeutic approaches by genotype. Our findings may potentially impact the management of a large number of patients with AF as 19% to 22% of different AF populations carry this variant ([22](#R22)). However, this hypothesis can only be truly evaluated in the context of a clinical trial, and these findings should be confirmed in randomized studies before tailoring AAD therapy for AF based on 4q25 genotype. The high recurrence of AF (30 – 50%) on AADs added to the risk of life threatening proarrhythmia, albeit small, strongly support the need for randomized pharmacogenetic trials and suggests that genetic assessment of therapeutic efficacy should be incorporated into all future trials of therapy for AF. If the current findings are confirmed, tailoring therapy based on 4q25 genotype is not only feasible but may reduce the cost burden associated with this arrhythmia.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by U19 HL65962, HL075266, and an AHA Established Investigator Award (0940116N).

## Abbreviations and Acronyms

## References

1. Feinberg WM, Blackshear JL, Laupacis A, Kronmal R, Hart RG. Prevalence, age distribution, and gender of patients with atrial fibrillation. Analysis and implications. Arch Intern Med. 1995;155:469–73.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7864703/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Arch%20Intern%20Med&title=Prevalence,%20age%20distribution,%20and%20gender%20of%20patients%20with%20atrial%20fibrillation.%20Analysis%20and%20implications&author=WM%20Feinberg&author=JL%20Blackshear&author=A%20Laupacis&author=R%20Kronmal&author=RG%20Hart&volume=155&publication_year=1995&pages=469-73&pmid=7864703&)

2. Evans W, Swann P. Lone auricular fibrillation. Br Heart J. 1954;16:189–194. doi: 10.1136/hrt.16.2.189.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/hrt.16.2.189) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC479515/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/13160271/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Br%20Heart%20J&title=Lone%20auricular%20fibrillation&author=W%20Evans&author=P%20Swann&volume=16&publication_year=1954&pages=189-194&pmid=13160271&doi=10.1136/hrt.16.2.189&)

3. Brugada R, Tapscott T, Czernuszewicz GZ, et al. Identification of a genetic locus for familial atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 1997;336:905–11. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199703273361302.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM199703273361302) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9070470/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N%20Engl%20J%20Med&title=Identification%20of%20a%20genetic%20locus%20for%20familial%20atrial%20fibrillation&author=R%20Brugada&author=T%20Tapscott&author=GZ%20Czernuszewicz&volume=336&publication_year=1997&pages=905-11&pmid=9070470&doi=10.1056/NEJM199703273361302&)

4. Chen YH, Xu SJ, Bendahhou S, et al. KCNQ1 gain-of-function mutation in familial atrial fibrillation. Science. 2003;299:251–4. doi: 10.1126/science.1077771.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1077771) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12522251/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=KCNQ1%20gain-of-function%20mutation%20in%20familial%20atrial%20fibrillation&author=YH%20Chen&author=SJ%20Xu&author=S%20Bendahhou&volume=299&publication_year=2003&pages=251-4&pmid=12522251&doi=10.1126/science.1077771&)

5. Chen LY, Shen WK. Epidemiology of atrial fibrillation: a current perspective. Heart Rhythm. 2007;4:S1–6. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2006.12.018.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrthm.2006.12.018) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17336876/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Heart%20Rhythm&title=Epidemiology%20of%20atrial%20fibrillation:%20a%20current%20perspective&author=LY%20Chen&author=WK%20Shen&volume=4&publication_year=2007&pages=S1-6&pmid=17336876&doi=10.1016/j.hrthm.2006.12.018&)

6. Coumel P. Paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Eur Heart J. 1994;15 doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/15.suppl_a.9.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/15.suppl_a.9) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8070496/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20Heart%20J&title=Paroxysmal%20atrial%20fibrillation&author=P%20Coumel&volume=15&publication_year=1994&pmid=8070496&doi=10.1093/eurheartj/15.suppl_a.9&)

7. Gollob MH, Jones DL, Krahn AD, et al. Somatic mutations in the connexin 40 gene (GJA5) in atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:2677–88. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa052800.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa052800) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16790700/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N%20Engl%20J%20Med&title=Somatic%20mutations%20in%20the%20connexin%2040%20gene%20(GJA5)%20in%20atrial%20fibrillation&author=MH%20Gollob&author=DL%20Jones&author=AD%20Krahn&volume=354&publication_year=2006&pages=2677-88&pmid=16790700&doi=10.1056/NEJMoa052800&)

8. Otway R, Vandenberg JI, Guo G, et al. Stretch-sensitive KCNQ1 mutation A link between genetic and environmental factors in the pathogenesis of atrial fibrillation? J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;49:578–86. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2006.09.044.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2006.09.044) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17276182/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Am%20Coll%20Cardiol&title=Stretch-sensitive%20KCNQ1%20mutation%20A%20link%20between%20genetic%20and%20environmental%20factors%20in%20the%20pathogenesis%20of%20atrial%20fibrillation?&author=R%20Otway&author=JI%20Vandenberg&author=G%20Guo&volume=49&publication_year=2007&pages=578-86&pmid=17276182&doi=10.1016/j.jacc.2006.09.044&)

9. Hodgson-Zingman DM, Karst ML, Zingman LV, et al. Atrial natriuretic peptide frameshift mutation in familial atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:158–65. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0706300.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0706300) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2518320/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18614783/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N%20Engl%20J%20Med&title=Atrial%20natriuretic%20peptide%20frameshift%20mutation%20in%20familial%20atrial%20fibrillation&author=DM%20Hodgson-Zingman&author=ML%20Karst&author=LV%20Zingman&volume=359&publication_year=2008&pages=158-65&pmid=18614783&doi=10.1056/NEJMoa0706300&)

10. Olson TM, Alekseev AE, Liu XK, et al. Kv1.5 channelopathy due to KCNA5 loss-of-function mutation causes human atrial fibrillation. Hum Mol Genet. 2006;15:2185–91. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddl143.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddl143) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16772329/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hum%20Mol%20Genet&title=Kv1.5%20channelopathy%20due%20to%20KCNA5%20loss-of-function%20mutation%20causes%20human%20atrial%20fibrillation&author=TM%20Olson&author=AE%20Alekseev&author=XK%20Liu&volume=15&publication_year=2006&pages=2185-91&pmid=16772329&doi=10.1093/hmg/ddl143&)

11. Darbar D, Kannankeril PJ, Donahue BS, et al. Cardiac sodium channel (SCN5A) variants associated with atrial fibrillation. Circulation. 2008;117:1927–35. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.757955.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.757955) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2365761/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18378609/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Cardiac%20sodium%20channel%20(SCN5A)%20variants%20associated%20with%20atrial%20fibrillation&author=D%20Darbar&author=PJ%20Kannankeril&author=BS%20Donahue&volume=117&publication_year=2008&pages=1927-35&pmid=18378609&doi=10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.757955&)

12. Zhang X, Chen S, Yoo S, et al. Mutation in nuclear pore component NUP155 leads to atrial fibrillation and early sudden cardiac death. Cell. 2008;135:1017–27. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.10.022.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2008.10.022) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19070573/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell&title=Mutation%20in%20nuclear%20pore%20component%20NUP155%20leads%20to%20atrial%20fibrillation%20and%20early%20sudden%20cardiac%20death&author=X%20Zhang&author=S%20Chen&author=S%20Yoo&volume=135&publication_year=2008&pages=1017-27&pmid=19070573&doi=10.1016/j.cell.2008.10.022&)

13. Gudbjartsson DF, Arnar DO, Helgadottir A, et al. Variants conferring risk of atrial fibrillation on chromosome 4q25. Nature. 2007;448:353–7. doi: 10.1038/nature06007.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06007) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17603472/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=Variants%20conferring%20risk%20of%20atrial%20fibrillation%20on%20chromosome%204q25&author=DF%20Gudbjartsson&author=DO%20Arnar&author=A%20Helgadottir&volume=448&publication_year=2007&pages=353-7&pmid=17603472&doi=10.1038/nature06007&)

14. Gudbjartsson DF, Holm H, Gretarsdottir S, et al. A sequence variant in ZFHX3 on 16q22 associates with atrial fibrillation and ischemic stroke. Nat Genet. 2009;8:876–8. doi: 10.1038/ng.417.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.417) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2740741/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19597491/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=A%20sequence%20variant%20in%20ZFHX3%20on%2016q22%20associates%20with%20atrial%20fibrillation%20and%20ischemic%20stroke&author=DF%20Gudbjartsson&author=H%20Holm&author=S%20Gretarsdottir&volume=8&publication_year=2009&pages=876-8&pmid=19597491&doi=10.1038/ng.417&)

15. Benjamin EJ, Rice KM, Arking DE, et al. Variants in ZFHX3 are associated with atrial fibrillation in individuals of European ancestry. Nat Genet. 2009;41:879–81. doi: 10.1038/ng.416.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.416) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2761746/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19597492/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=Variants%20in%20ZFHX3%20are%20associated%20with%20atrial%20fibrillation%20in%20individuals%20of%20European%20ancestry&author=EJ%20Benjamin&author=KM%20Rice&author=DE%20Arking&volume=41&publication_year=2009&pages=879-81&pmid=19597492&doi=10.1038/ng.416&)

16. Ellinor PT, Lunetta KL, Glazer NL, et al. Common variants in KCNN3 are associated with lone atrial fibrillation. Nat Genet. 2010;42:240–44. doi: 10.1038/ng.537.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.537) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2871387/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20173747/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=Common%20variants%20in%20KCNN3%20are%20associated%20with%20lone%20atrial%20fibrillation&author=PT%20Ellinor&author=KL%20Lunetta&author=NL%20Glazer&volume=42&publication_year=2010&pages=240-44&pmid=20173747&doi=10.1038/ng.537&)

17. Kaab S, Darbar D, van Noord C, et al. Large scale replication and meta-analysis of variants on chromosome 4q25 associated with atrial fibrillation. European heart journal. 2009;30:813–9. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehn578.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehn578) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2663727/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19141561/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=European%20heart%20journal&title=Large%20scale%20replication%20and%20meta-analysis%20of%20variants%20on%20chromosome%204q25%20associated%20with%20atrial%20fibrillation&author=S%20Kaab&author=D%20Darbar&author=C%20van%20Noord&volume=30&publication_year=2009&pages=813-9&pmid=19141561&doi=10.1093/eurheartj/ehn578&)

18. Body SC, Collard CD, Shernan SK, et al. Variation in the 4q25 chromosomal locus predicts atrial fibrillation after coronary artery bypass graft surgery. Circulation. Cardiovascular genetics. 2009;2:499–506. doi: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.109.849075.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.109.849075) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2801871/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20031626/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation.%20Cardiovascular%20genetics&title=Variation%20in%20the%204q25%20chromosomal%20locus%20predicts%20atrial%20fibrillation%20after%20coronary%20artery%20bypass%20graft%20surgery&author=SC%20Body&author=CD%20Collard&author=SK%20Shernan&volume=2&publication_year=2009&pages=499-506&pmid=20031626&doi=10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.109.849075&)

19. Husser D, Adams V, Piorkowski C, Hindricks G, Bollmann A. Chromosome 4q25 variants and atrial fibrillation recurrence after catheter ablation. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 2010;55:747–53. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2009.11.041.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2009.11.041) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20170812/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Journal%20of%20the%20American%20College%20of%20Cardiology&title=Chromosome%204q25%20variants%20and%20atrial%20fibrillation%20recurrence%20after%20catheter%20ablation&author=D%20Husser&author=V%20Adams&author=C%20Piorkowski&author=G%20Hindricks&author=A%20Bollmann&volume=55&publication_year=2010&pages=747-53&pmid=20170812&doi=10.1016/j.jacc.2009.11.041&)

20. Darbar D, Motsinger AA, Ritchie MD, Gainer JV, Roden DM. Polymorphism modulates symptomatic response to antiarrhythmic drug therapy in patients with lone atrial fibrillation. Heart Rhythm. 2007;4:743–9. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2007.02.006.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrthm.2007.02.006) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1948880/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17556195/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Heart%20Rhythm&title=Polymorphism%20modulates%20symptomatic%20response%20to%20antiarrhythmic%20drug%20therapy%20in%20patients%20with%20lone%20atrial%20fibrillation&author=D%20Darbar&author=AA%20Motsinger&author=MD%20Ritchie&author=JV%20Gainer&author=DM%20Roden&volume=4&publication_year=2007&pages=743-9&pmid=17556195&doi=10.1016/j.hrthm.2007.02.006&)

21. Dorian P, Paquette M, Newman D, et al. Quality of life improves with treatment in the Canadian Trial of Atrial Fibrillation. Am Heart J. 2002;143:984–90. doi: 10.1067/mhj.2002.122518.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1067/mhj.2002.122518) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12075253/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20Heart%20J&title=Quality%20of%20life%20improves%20with%20treatment%20in%20the%20Canadian%20Trial%20of%20Atrial%20Fibrillation&author=P%20Dorian&author=M%20Paquette&author=D%20Newman&volume=143&publication_year=2002&pages=984-90&pmid=12075253&doi=10.1067/mhj.2002.122518&)

22. Kaab S, Darbar D, van Noord C, et al. Large scale replication and meta-analysis of variants on chromosome 4q25 associated with atrial fibrillation. Eur Heart J. 2009;30:813–9. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehn578.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehn578) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2663727/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19141561/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20Heart%20J&title=Large%20scale%20replication%20and%20meta-analysis%20of%20variants%20on%20chromosome%204q25%20associated%20with%20atrial%20fibrillation&author=S%20Kaab&author=D%20Darbar&author=C%20van%20Noord&volume=30&publication_year=2009&pages=813-9&pmid=19141561&doi=10.1093/eurheartj/ehn578&)

23. Gudbjartsson DF, Arnar DO, Helgadottir A, et al. Variants conferring risk of atrial fibrillation on chromosome 4q25. Nature. 2007;488:353–7. doi: 10.1038/nature06007.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06007) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17603472/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=Variants%20conferring%20risk%20of%20atrial%20fibrillation%20on%20chromosome%204q25&author=DF%20Gudbjartsson&author=DO%20Arnar&author=A%20Helgadottir&volume=488&publication_year=2007&pages=353-7&pmid=17603472&doi=10.1038/nature06007&)

24. Mommersteeg MT, Brown NA, Prall OW, et al. Pitx2c and Nkx2-5 are required for the formation and identity of the pulmonary myocardium. Circ Res. 2007;101:902–9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.107.161182.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.107.161182) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17823370/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circ%20Res&title=Pitx2c%20and%20Nkx2-5%20are%20required%20for%20the%20formation%20and%20identity%20of%20the%20pulmonary%20myocardium&author=MT%20Mommersteeg&author=NA%20Brown&author=OW%20Prall&volume=101&publication_year=2007&pages=902-9&pmid=17823370&doi=10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.107.161182&)

25. Wang J, Klysik E, Sood S, Johnson RL, Wehrens XH, Martin JF. Pitx2 prevents susceptibility to atrial arrhythmias by inhibiting left-sided pacemaker specification. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 107:9753–8. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0912585107.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0912585107) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2906838/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20457925/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20U%20S%20A&title=Pitx2%20prevents%20susceptibility%20to%20atrial%20arrhythmias%20by%20inhibiting%20left-sided%20pacemaker%20specification&author=J%20Wang&author=E%20Klysik&author=S%20Sood&author=RL%20Johnson&author=XH%20Wehrens&volume=107&pages=9753-8&pmid=20457925&doi=10.1073/pnas.0912585107&)

26. Haissaguerre M, Jais P, Shah DC, et al. Spontaneous initiation of atrial fibrillation by ectopic beats originating in the pulmonary veins. N Engl J Med. 1998;339:659–66. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199809033391003.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM199809033391003) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9725923/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N%20Engl%20J%20Med&title=Spontaneous%20initiation%20of%20atrial%20fibrillation%20by%20ectopic%20beats%20originating%20in%20the%20pulmonary%20veins&author=M%20Haissaguerre&author=P%20Jais&author=DC%20Shah&volume=339&publication_year=1998&pages=659-66&pmid=9725923&doi=10.1056/NEJM199809033391003&)

27. Lubitz SA, Sinner MF, Lunetta KL, et al. Independent susceptibility markers for atrial fibrillation on chromosome 4q25. Circulation. 2010;122:976–84. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.886440.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.886440) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2978508/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20733104/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Independent%20susceptibility%20markers%20for%20atrial%20fibrillation%20on%20chromosome%204q25&author=SA%20Lubitz&author=MF%20Sinner&author=KL%20Lunetta&volume=122&publication_year=2010&pages=976-84&pmid=20733104&doi=10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.886440&)

28. Abraham RL, Yang T, Blair M, Roden DM, Darbar D. Augmented potassium current is a shared phenotype for two genetic defects associated with familial atrial fibrillation. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2010;48:181–90. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2009.07.020.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yjmcc.2009.07.020) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2813326/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19646991/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Mol%20Cell%20Cardiol&title=Augmented%20potassium%20current%20is%20a%20shared%20phenotype%20for%20two%20genetic%20defects%20associated%20with%20familial%20atrial%20fibrillation&author=RL%20Abraham&author=T%20Yang&author=M%20Blair&author=DM%20Roden&author=D%20Darbar&volume=48&publication_year=2010&pages=181-90&pmid=19646991&doi=10.1016/j.yjmcc.2009.07.020&)

29. Voigt N, Trausch A, Knaut M, et al. Left-to-right atrial inward rectifier potassium current gradients in patients with paroxysmal versus chronic atrial fibrillation. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 3:472–80. doi: 10.1161/CIRCEP.110.954636.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCEP.110.954636) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5832445/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20657029/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circ%20Arrhythm%20Electrophysiol&title=Left-to-right%20atrial%20inward%20rectifier%20potassium%20current%20gradients%20in%20patients%20with%20paroxysmal%20versus%20chronic%20atrial%20fibrillation&author=N%20Voigt&author=A%20Trausch&author=M%20Knaut&volume=3&pages=472-80&pmid=20657029&doi=10.1161/CIRCEP.110.954636&)

30. Kirchhof P, Kahr PC, Kaese S, et al. PITX2c is Expressed in the Adult Left Atrium, and Reducing Pitx2c Expression Promotes Atrial Fibrillation Inducibility and Complex Changes in Gene Expression. Circulation. Cardiovascular genetics. 2011 doi: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.110.958058.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.110.958058) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21282332/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation.%20Cardiovascular%20genetics&title=PITX2c%20is%20Expressed%20in%20the%20Adult%20Left%20Atrium,%20and%20Reducing%20Pitx2c%20Expression%20Promotes%20Atrial%20Fibrillation%20Inducibility%20and%20Complex%20Changes%20in%20Gene%20Expression&author=P%20Kirchhof&author=PC%20Kahr&author=S%20Kaese&publication_year=2011&pmid=21282332&doi=10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.110.958058&)

31. Chinchilla A, Daimi H, Lozano-Velasco E, et al. PITX2 Insufficiency Leads to Atrial Electrical and Structural Remodeling Linked to Arrhythmogenesis. Circulation. Cardiovascular genetics. 2011;4:269–79. doi: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.110.958116.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.110.958116) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21511879/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cardiovascular%20genetics&title=PITX2%20Insufficiency%20Leads%20to%20Atrial%20Electrical%20and%20Structural%20Remodeling%20Linked%20to%20Arrhythmogenesis.%20Circulation&author=A%20Chinchilla&author=H%20Daimi&author=E%20Lozano-Velasco&volume=4&publication_year=2011&pages=269-79&pmid=21511879&doi=10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.110.958116&)

32. Burgner D, Davila S, Breunis WB, et al. A genome-wide association study identifies novel and functionally related susceptibility Loci for Kawasaki disease. PLoS Genet. 2009;5:e1000319. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000319.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000319) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2607021/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19132087/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Genet&title=A%20genome-wide%20association%20study%20identifies%20novel%20and%20functionally%20related%20susceptibility%20Loci%20for%20Kawasaki%20disease&author=D%20Burgner&author=S%20Davila&author=WB%20Breunis&volume=5&publication_year=2009&pages=e1000319&pmid=19132087&doi=10.1371/journal.pgen.1000319&)

33. Sun X, Frierson HF, Chen C, et al. Frequent somatic mutations of the transcription factor ATBF1 in human prostate cancer. Nat Genet. 2005;37:407–12. doi: 10.1038/ng1528.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1528) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15750593/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=Frequent%20somatic%20mutations%20of%20the%20transcription%20factor%20ATBF1%20in%20human%20prostate%20cancer&author=X%20Sun&author=HF%20Frierson&author=C%20Chen&volume=37&publication_year=2005&pages=407-12&pmid=15750593&doi=10.1038/ng1528&)

34. Vaglio J, Rowan SC, Stubblefield T, Carter S, Roden DM, Darbar D. Genetic and clinical predictors of response to rate control therapy in patients with atrial fibrillation. Circulation. 2008;118:S828.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Genetic%20and%20clinical%20predictors%20of%20response%20to%20rate%20control%20therapy%20in%20patients%20with%20atrial%20fibrillation&author=J%20Vaglio&author=SC%20Rowan&author=T%20Stubblefield&author=S%20Carter&author=DM%20Roden&volume=118&publication_year=2008&pages=S828&)
