# Genome-wide association study identifies a susceptibility locus at 21q21 for ventricular fibrillation in acute myocardial infarction

## Metadata
**Authors:** Connie R Bezzina, Raha Pazoki, Abdennasser Bardai, Roos F Marsman, Jonas S S G de Jong, Marieke T Blom, Brendon P Scicluna, J Wouter Jukema, Navin R Bindraban, Peter Lichtner, Arne Pfeufer, Nanette H Bishopric, Dan M Roden, Thomas Meitinger, Sumeet S Chugh, Robert J Myerburg, Xavier Jouven, Stefan Kääb, Lukas R C Dekker, Hanno L Tan, Michael W T Tanck, Arthur A M Wilde
**Journal:** Nature genetics
**Date:** 2010 Jul 11
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.623](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.623)
**PMID:** 20622880
**PMCID:** PMC3966292
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3966292/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3966292/pdf/nihms-561783.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3966292/pdf/nihms-561783.pdf)

## Abstract

Sudden cardiac death from ventricular fibrillation during acute myocardial infarction is a leading cause of total and cardiovascular mortality. To our knowledge, we here report the first genome-wide association study for this trait, conducted in a set of 972 individuals with a first acute myocardial infarction, 515 of whom had ventricular fibrillation and 457 of whom did not, from the Arrhythmia Genetics in The Netherlands (AGNES) study. The most significant association to ventricular fibrillation was found at 21q21 (rs2824292, odds ratio = 1.78, 95% CI 1.47–2.13, P = 3.3 × 10−10). The association of rs2824292 with ventricular fibrillation was replicated in an independent case-control set consisting of 146 out-of-hospital cardiac arrest individuals with myocardial infarction complicated by ventricular fibrillation and 391 individuals who survived a myocardial infarction (controls) (odds ratio = 1.49, 95% CI 1.14–1.95, P = 0.004). The closest gene to this SNP is CXADR, which encodes a viral receptor previously implicated in myocarditis and dilated cardiomyopathy and which has recently been identified as a modulator of cardiac conduction. This locus has not previously been implicated in arrhythmia susceptibility.

## ONLINE METHODS

### Study samples

All individuals studied were Dutch and of self-declared European descent. The medical ethics committees of the hospitals participating in the study approved the study protocols, and all participants gave written informed consent.

#### The AGNES sample

The AGNES case-control set consisted of individuals with a first acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction^13^. AGNES cases had ECG-registered ventricular fibrillation occurring before reperfusion therapy for an acute and first ST-elevation myocardial infarction. AGNES controls were individuals with a first acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction but without ventricular fibrillation. All cases and controls were recruited at seven heart centers in The Netherlands from 2001–2008. We excluded individuals with an actual non–ST-elevation myocardial infarction, prior myocardial infarction, congenital heart defects, known structural heart disease, severe comorbidity, electrolyte disturbances, trauma at presentation, recent surgery, previous coronary artery bypass graft or use of class I and III antiarrhythmic drugs. Individuals who developed ventricular fibrillation during or after percutaneous coronary intervention were not eligible. Furthermore, because early reperfusion limits the opportunity of developing ventricular fibrillation, potential control subjects undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention within 2 h after onset of myocardial ischemia symptoms were not included. This time interval was based on the observation that >90% of cases developed ventricular fibrillation within 2 h after onset of the complaint of symptoms.

#### The ARREST-MI sample

The ARREST-MI sample was drawn from the ARREST study. ARREST is an ongoing prospective population-based study aimed at establishing the genetic, clinical and environmental determinants of SCD in the general population. Dutch out-of-hospital cardiac arrest patients of European ancestry in the ARREST dataset presenting with myocardial infarction at hospital admission and with ECG-documented ventricular fibrillation were included in the replication analysis. The diagnosis of myocardial infarction was established at hospital admission by a cardiologist based on ECG abnormalities and cardiac enzymes and these data were retrieved retrospectively from hospital records. At the time of this study (August 2009), 146 such individuals were retrieved and all were included in the replication study.

#### The GENDER-MI sample

The GENDER-MI sample included individuals with a history of myocardial infarction drawn from the GENDER study^14^, a study aimed at investigating the association between genetic polymorphisms and clinical restenosis. The GENDER study comprises consecutive individuals who underwent successful PTCA for treatment of stable angina, non–ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes or silent ischemia at four referral centers for interventional cardiology in The Netherlands. The inclusion period lasted from March 1999 until June 2001 and in total, 3,104 consecutive individuals were included in this prospective, multicenter, follow-up study. Approximately 40% of subjects included in the GENDER study had a history of myocardial infarction.

A sample of 941 GENDER subjects was genotyped on the Illumina Human 610-Quad Beadchips^32^. The GENDER-MI sample used in the current study consisted of 391 of these genotyped cases, and all of these 391 individuals had a history of myocardial infarction.

#### Random sample of the Dutch general population

The random sample of the Dutch general population constituted the European descent component of the Surinamese in The Netherlands: Study on Ethnicity and Health study, a cross-sectional study that aimed to assess the cardiovascular risk profile of three ethnic groups in The Netherlands: Creole, Hindustani and individuals of European ancestry^33^. It was based on a sample of 35–60-year-old, noninstitutionalized people from southeast Amsterdam. A random sample of 2,000 Surinamese individuals and approximately 1,000 Dutch individuals of European ancestry were drawn from the Amsterdam population register between 2001 and 2003. People were classified as Dutch if they and both of their parents were born in The Netherlands. The overall response rate was 61% among these Dutch individuals. Those who responded to the oral interview were invited for a medical examination, at which time blood for DNA extraction was drawn. The response rate at this stage among the Dutch individuals was 90%, resulting in a total of 508 subjects with DNA samples available. DNA samples from these 508 subjects were used for genotyping in the current study.

### Genotyping

Genome-wide genotyping of SNPs on the 515 AGNES cases and 457 AGNES controls was done using the Illumina Human610-Quad v1 array. The analysis was performed with the BeadStudio software and the Genotyping module version 3.2.33 using the cluster file provided by Illumina (Human610-Quadv1_B.egt). The GenCall score cutoff was 0.15 and the average call rate was 99.45%.

Multiple quality control measures were implemented. The estimated sex for each individual determined by genotyping was compared with their phenotypic sex. Exclusion criteria included deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium at *P* < 10^−4^ (in controls), sample call rate <0.95 and SNP call rate <0.98.

For GENDER-MI, genotypes at rs2824292, rs1353342 and rs12090554 were extracted from previously obtained genotypes using the Illumina Human 610-Quad Beadchip^32^. Quality control criteria for the genotypic data for the GENDER study were the same as those applied in the AGNES study.

For ARREST-MI and for the sample of the Dutch European descent population, genotypes at rs2824292, rs1353342 and rs12090554 were determined by means of a Taqman assay (Applied Biosystems).

### Statistical analysis and imputation

Differences in continuous phenotypic variables between cases and controls were tested using an independent *t* test when data were normally distributed or a Mann-Whitney *U* test otherwise. Values are presented as means ± s.d. or median and interquartile range, respectively. Differences in categorical variables were compared using a Fisher exact test, and values are presented as number and percentages.

Genotype imputation was done using the Markov-chain Monte Carlo method implemented in MACH1.0^34^. An *r* ^2^ threshold of 0.3 was implemented in the program to identify and discard low-quality imputations.

Each SNP was analyzed for association with ventricular fibrillation using logistic regression assuming an additive genetic model with adjustment for age and sex, using the ProbABEL analysis package^35^. SNPs with a minor allele frequency >0.05 were analyzed. The *P* value for genome-wide significance was set at *P* < 5 × 10^−8^, corresponding to a target α (or *P* value) of 0.05 with a Bonferroni correction for 1 million independent tests^36^. The *P* values were corrected for the genomic control factor. A two-sided *P* value of *P* < 0.017 (Bonferroni-corrected *P* value for the three independent SNPs) was considered as significant in the replication study.

In the multifactor analysis, we adjusted for age, sex, hypercholesterolemia, diabetes, ST segment deviation, maximal CK-MB, body mass index and family history of sudden cardiac death.

## Supplementary Material

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This study was supported by research grants from The Netherlands Heart Foundation (grants 2001D019, 2003T302 and 2007B202), the Leducq Foundation (grant 05-CVD), the Center for Translational Molecular Medicine (CTMM COHFAR) and the Interuniversity Cardiology Institute of The Netherlands (project 27). C.R.B. is an Established Investigator of The Netherlands Heart Foundation (grant 2005T024). H.L.T. is supported by The Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO, grant ZonMW Vici 918.86.616) and the Medicines Evaluation Board Netherlands (CBG). A.B. was supported by The Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO, grant Mozaiek 017.003.084). A.H. Zwinderman and E.P.A. van Iperen provided the genotype data from the GENDER study. We thank L. Beekman for technical support and N. Bruinsma for assistance in collection of subject data.

## Footnotes

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Supplementary Materials

### Supplementary Materials

## References

1. Myerburg RJ, Castellanos A. Cardiac arrest and sudden cardiac death. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Zipes DP, editors. Braunwald’s Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine. Elsevier; Oxford, UK: 2007. pp. 933–974.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Braunwald%E2%80%99s%20Heart%20Disease:%20A%20Textbook%20of%20Cardiovascular%20Medicine&author=RJ%20Myerburg&author=A%20Castellanos&publication_year=2007&)

2. Huikuri HV, Castellanos A, Myerburg RJ. Sudden death due to cardiac arrhythmias. N. Engl. J. Med. 2001;345:1473–1482. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra000650.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra000650) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11794197/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N.%20Engl.%20J.%20Med&title=Sudden%20death%20due%20to%20cardiac%20arrhythmias&author=HV%20Huikuri&author=A%20Castellanos&author=RJ%20Myerburg&volume=345&publication_year=2001&pages=1473-1482&pmid=11794197&doi=10.1056/NEJMra000650&)

3. Arking DE, Chugh SS, Chakravarti A, Spooner PM. Genomics in sudden cardiac death. Circ. Res. 2004;94:712–723. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000123861.16082.95.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.0000123861.16082.95) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15059941/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circ.%20Res&title=Genomics%20in%20sudden%20cardiac%20death&author=DE%20Arking&author=SS%20Chugh&author=A%20Chakravarti&author=PM%20Spooner&volume=94&publication_year=2004&pages=712-723&pmid=15059941&doi=10.1161/01.RES.0000123861.16082.95&)

4. Wilde AA, Bezzina CR. Genetics of cardiac arrhythmias. Heart. 2005;91:1352–1358. doi: 10.1136/hrt.2004.046334.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/hrt.2004.046334) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1769155/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16162633/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Heart&title=Genetics%20of%20cardiac%20arrhythmias&author=AA%20Wilde&author=CR%20Bezzina&volume=91&publication_year=2005&pages=1352-1358&pmid=16162633&doi=10.1136/hrt.2004.046334&)

5. Watkins H, Ashrafian H, McKenna WJ. The genetics of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: teare redux. Heart. 2008;94:1264–1268. doi: 10.1136/hrt.2008.154104.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/hrt.2008.154104) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18653576/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Heart&title=The%20genetics%20of%20hypertrophic%20cardiomyopathy:%20teare%20redux&author=H%20Watkins&author=H%20Ashrafian&author=WJ%20McKenna&volume=94&publication_year=2008&pages=1264-1268&pmid=18653576&doi=10.1136/hrt.2008.154104&)

6. Zipes DP, Wellens HJ. Sudden cardiac death. Circulation. 1998;98:2334–2351. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.98.21.2334.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.98.21.2334) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9826323/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Sudden%20cardiac%20death&author=DP%20Zipes&author=HJ%20Wellens&volume=98&publication_year=1998&pages=2334-2351&pmid=9826323&doi=10.1161/01.cir.98.21.2334&)

7. Zipes DP, et al. ACC/AHA/ESC 2006 guidelines for management of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force and the European Society of Cardiology Committee for Practice Guidelines (writing committee to develop guidelines for management of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death): developed in collaboration with the European Heart Rhythm Association and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation. 2006;114:e385–e484. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.178233.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.178233) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16935995/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=ACC/AHA/ESC%202006%20guidelines%20for%20management%20of%20patients%20with%20ventricular%20arrhythmias%20and%20the%20prevention%20of%20sudden%20cardiac%20death:%20a%20report%20of%20the%20American%20College%20of%20Cardiology/American%20Heart%20Association%20Task%20Force%20and%20the%20European%20Society%20of%20Cardiology%20Committee%20for%20Practice%20Guidelines%20(writing%20committee%20to%20develop%20guidelines%20for%20management%20of%20patients%20with%20ventricular%20arrhythmias%20and%20the%20prevention%20of%20sudden%20cardiac%20death):%20developed%20in%20collaboration%20with%20the%20European%20Heart%20Rhythm%20Association%20and%20the%20Heart%20Rhythm%20Society&author=DP%20Zipes&volume=114&publication_year=2006&pages=e385-e484&pmid=16935995&doi=10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.178233&)

8. Myerburg RJ. Sudden cardiac death: exploring the limits of our knowledge. J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol. 2001;12:369–381. doi: 10.1046/j.1540-8167.2001.00369.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1540-8167.2001.00369.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11291815/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Cardiovasc.%20Electrophysiol&title=Sudden%20cardiac%20death:%20exploring%20the%20limits%20of%20our%20knowledge&author=RJ%20Myerburg&volume=12&publication_year=2001&pages=369-381&pmid=11291815&doi=10.1046/j.1540-8167.2001.00369.x&)

9. Noseworthy PA, Newton-Cheh C. Genetic determinants of sudden cardiac death. Circulation. 2008;118:1854–1863. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.783654.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.783654) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18955676/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Genetic%20determinants%20of%20sudden%20cardiac%20death&author=PA%20Noseworthy&author=C%20Newton-Cheh&volume=118&publication_year=2008&pages=1854-1863&pmid=18955676&doi=10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.783654&)

10. Myerburg RJ, Castellanos A. Emerging paradigms of the epidemiology and demographics of sudden cardiac arrest. Heart Rhythm. 2006;3:235–239. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2005.09.023.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrthm.2005.09.023) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16443542/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Heart%20Rhythm&title=Emerging%20paradigms%20of%20the%20epidemiology%20and%20demographics%20of%20sudden%20cardiac%20arrest&author=RJ%20Myerburg&author=A%20Castellanos&volume=3&publication_year=2006&pages=235-239&pmid=16443542&doi=10.1016/j.hrthm.2005.09.023&)

11. Friedlander Y, et al. Family history as a risk factor for primary cardiac arrest. Circulation. 1998;97:155–160. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.97.2.155.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.97.2.155) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9445167/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Family%20history%20as%20a%20risk%20factor%20for%20primary%20cardiac%20arrest&author=Y%20Friedlander&volume=97&publication_year=1998&pages=155-160&pmid=9445167&doi=10.1161/01.cir.97.2.155&)

12. Jouven X, Desnos M, Guerot C, Ducimetiere P. Predicting sudden death in the population: the Paris Prospective Study I. Circulation. 1999;99:1978–1983. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.99.15.1978.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.99.15.1978) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10209001/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Predicting%20sudden%20death%20in%20the%20population:%20the%20Paris%20Prospective%20Study%20I&author=X%20Jouven&author=M%20Desnos&author=C%20Guerot&author=P%20Ducimetiere&volume=99&publication_year=1999&pages=1978-1983&pmid=10209001&doi=10.1161/01.cir.99.15.1978&)

13. Dekker LR, et al. Familial sudden death is an important risk factor for primary ventricular fibrillation: a case-control study in acute myocardial infarction patients. Circulation. 2006;114:1140–1145. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.606145.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.606145) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16940195/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Familial%20sudden%20death%20is%20an%20important%20risk%20factor%20for%20primary%20ventricular%20fibrillation:%20a%20case-control%20study%20in%20acute%20myocardial%20infarction%20patients&author=LR%20Dekker&volume=114&publication_year=2006&pages=1140-1145&pmid=16940195&doi=10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.606145&)

14. Agema WR, et al. Current PTCA practice and clinical outcomes in The Netherlands: the real world in the pre-drug-eluting stent era. Eur. Heart J. 2004;25:1163–1170. doi: 10.1016/j.ehj.2004.05.006.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ehj.2004.05.006) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15231375/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur.%20Heart%20J&title=Current%20PTCA%20practice%20and%20clinical%20outcomes%20in%20The%20Netherlands:%20the%20real%20world%20in%20the%20pre-drug-eluting%20stent%20era&author=WR%20Agema&volume=25&publication_year=2004&pages=1163-1170&pmid=15231375&doi=10.1016/j.ehj.2004.05.006&)

15. Kleinjan DA, van Heyningen V. Long-range control of gene expression: emerging mechanisms and disruption in disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2005;76:8–32. doi: 10.1086/426833.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/426833) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1196435/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15549674/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Hum.%20Genet&title=Long-range%20control%20of%20gene%20expression:%20emerging%20mechanisms%20and%20disruption%20in%20disease&author=DA%20Kleinjan&author=V%20van%20Heyningen&volume=76&publication_year=2005&pages=8-32&pmid=15549674&doi=10.1086/426833&)

16. Bergelson JM, et al. Isolation of a common receptor for coxsackie B viruses and adenoviruses 2 and 5. Science. 1997;275:1320–1323. doi: 10.1126/science.275.5304.1320.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.275.5304.1320) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9036860/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=Isolation%20of%20a%20common%20receptor%20for%20coxsackie%20B%20viruses%20and%20adenoviruses%202%20and%205&author=JM%20Bergelson&volume=275&publication_year=1997&pages=1320-1323&pmid=9036860&doi=10.1126/science.275.5304.1320&)

17. Tomko RP, Xu R, Philipson L. HCAR and MCAR: the human and mouse cellular receptors for subgroup C adenoviruses and group B coxsackieviruses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 1997;94:3352–3356. doi: 10.1073/pnas.94.7.3352.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.94.7.3352) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC20373/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9096397/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc.%20Natl.%20Acad.%20Sci.%20USA&title=HCAR%20and%20MCAR:%20the%20human%20and%20mouse%20cellular%20receptors%20for%20subgroup%20C%20adenoviruses%20and%20group%20B%20coxsackieviruses&author=RP%20Tomko&author=R%20Xu&author=L%20Philipson&volume=94&publication_year=1997&pages=3352-3356&pmid=9096397&doi=10.1073/pnas.94.7.3352&)

18. Bowles NE, Richardson PJ, Olsen EG, Archard LC. Detection of coxsackie-B-virus-specific RNA sequences in myocardial biopsy samples from patients with myocarditis and dilated cardiomyopathy. Lancet. 1986;1:1120–1123. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(86)91837-4.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(86)91837-4) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2871380/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Lancet&title=Detection%20of%20coxsackie-B-virus-specific%20RNA%20sequences%20in%20myocardial%20biopsy%20samples%20from%20patients%20with%20myocarditis%20and%20dilated%20cardiomyopathy&author=NE%20Bowles&author=PJ%20Richardson&author=EG%20Olsen&author=LC%20Archard&volume=1&publication_year=1986&pages=1120-1123&pmid=2871380&doi=10.1016/s0140-6736(86)91837-4&)

19. Pauschinger M, et al. Detection of adenoviral genome in the myocardium of adult patients with idiopathic left ventricular dysfunction. Circulation. 1999;99:1348–1354. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.99.10.1348.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.99.10.1348) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10077520/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Detection%20of%20adenoviral%20genome%20in%20the%20myocardium%20of%20adult%20patients%20with%20idiopathic%20left%20ventricular%20dysfunction&author=M%20Pauschinger&volume=99&publication_year=1999&pages=1348-1354&pmid=10077520&doi=10.1161/01.cir.99.10.1348&)

20. Andréoletti L, et al. Active coxsackieviral B infection is associated with disruption of dystrophin in endomyocardial tissue of patients who died suddenly of acute myocardial infarction. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 2007;50:2207–2214. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2007.07.080.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2007.07.080) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18061067/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Am.%20Coll.%20Cardiol&title=Active%20coxsackieviral%20B%20infection%20is%20associated%20with%20disruption%20of%20dystrophin%20in%20endomyocardial%20tissue%20of%20patients%20who%20died%20suddenly%20of%20acute%20myocardial%20infarction&author=L%20Andr%C3%A9oletti&volume=50&publication_year=2007&pages=2207-2214&pmid=18061067&doi=10.1016/j.jacc.2007.07.080&)

21. Lisewski U, et al. The tight junction protein CAR regulates cardiac conduction and cell-cell communication. J. Exp. Med. 2008;205:2369–2379. doi: 10.1084/jem.20080897.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20080897) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2556793/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18794341/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Exp.%20Med&title=The%20tight%20junction%20protein%20CAR%20regulates%20cardiac%20conduction%20and%20cell-cell%20communication&author=U%20Lisewski&volume=205&publication_year=2008&pages=2369-2379&pmid=18794341&doi=10.1084/jem.20080897&)

22. Lim BK, et al. Coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor (CAR) mediates atrioventricular-node function and connexin 45 localization in the murine heart. J. Clin. Invest. 2008;118:2758–2770. doi: 10.1172/JCI34777.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI34777) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2467382/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18636119/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Clin.%20Invest&title=Coxsackievirus%20and%20adenovirus%20receptor%20(CAR)%20mediates%20atrioventricular-node%20function%20and%20connexin%2045%20localization%20in%20the%20murine%20heart&author=BK%20Lim&volume=118&publication_year=2008&pages=2758-2770&pmid=18636119&doi=10.1172/JCI34777&)

23. Yoshida Y, et al. ANA, a novel member of Tob/BTG1 family, is expressed in the ventricular zone of the developing central nervous system. Oncogene. 1998;16:2687–2693. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1201805.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1201805) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9632145/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Oncogene&title=ANA,%20a%20novel%20member%20of%20Tob/BTG1%20family,%20is%20expressed%20in%20the%20ventricular%20zone%20of%20the%20developing%20central%20nervous%20system&author=Y%20Yoshida&volume=16&publication_year=1998&pages=2687-2693&pmid=9632145&doi=10.1038/sj.onc.1201805&)

24. Strausberg RL, et al. Generation and initial analysis of more than 15,000 full-length human and mouse cDNA sequences. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2002;99:16899–16903. doi: 10.1073/pnas.242603899.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.242603899) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC139241/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12477932/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc.%20Natl.%20Acad.%20Sci.%20USA&title=Generation%20and%20initial%20analysis%20of%20more%20than%2015,000%20full-length%20human%20and%20mouse%20cDNA%20sequences&author=RL%20Strausberg&volume=99&publication_year=2002&pages=16899-16903&pmid=12477932&doi=10.1073/pnas.242603899&)

25. Godbout R, Andison R, Katyal S, Bisgrove DA. Isolation of a novel cDNA enriched in the undifferentiated chick retina and lens. Dev. Dyn. 2003;227:409–415. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.10310.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.10310) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12815627/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Dev.%20Dyn&title=Isolation%20of%20a%20novel%20cDNA%20enriched%20in%20the%20undifferentiated%20chick%20retina%20and%20lens&author=R%20Godbout&author=R%20Andison&author=S%20Katyal&author=DA%20Bisgrove&volume=227&publication_year=2003&pages=409-415&pmid=12815627&doi=10.1002/dvdy.10310&)

26. Arking DE, et al. A common genetic variant in the NOS1 regulator NOS1AP modulates cardiac repolarization. Nat. Genet. 2006;38:644–651. doi: 10.1038/ng1790.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1790) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16648850/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Genet&title=A%20common%20genetic%20variant%20in%20the%20NOS1%20regulator%20NOS1AP%20modulates%20cardiac%20repolarization&author=DE%20Arking&volume=38&publication_year=2006&pages=644-651&pmid=16648850&doi=10.1038/ng1790&)

27. Newton-Cheh C, et al. Common variants at ten loci influence QT interval duration in the QTGEN Study. Nat. Genet. 2009;41:399–406. doi: 10.1038/ng.364.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.364) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2701449/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19305408/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Genet&title=Common%20variants%20at%20ten%20loci%20influence%20QT%20interval%20duration%20in%20the%20QTGEN%20Study&author=C%20Newton-Cheh&volume=41&publication_year=2009&pages=399-406&pmid=19305408&doi=10.1038/ng.364&)

28. Pfeufer A, et al. Common variants at ten loci modulate the QT interval duration in the QTSCD Study. Nat. Genet. 2009;41:407–414. doi: 10.1038/ng.362.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.362) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2976045/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19305409/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Genet&title=Common%20variants%20at%20ten%20loci%20modulate%20the%20QT%20interval%20duration%20in%20the%20QTSCD%20Study&author=A%20Pfeufer&volume=41&publication_year=2009&pages=407-414&pmid=19305409&doi=10.1038/ng.362&)

29. Kao WH, et al. Genetic variations in nitric oxide synthase 1 adaptor protein are associated with sudden cardiac death in US white community-based populations. Circulation. 2009;119:940–951. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.791723.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.791723) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2782762/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19204306/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Genetic%20variations%20in%20nitric%20oxide%20synthase%201%20adaptor%20protein%20are%20associated%20with%20sudden%20cardiac%20death%20in%20US%20white%20community-based%20populations&author=WH%20Kao&volume=119&publication_year=2009&pages=940-951&pmid=19204306&doi=10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.791723&)

30. Eijgelsheim M, et al. Genetic variation in NOS1AP is associated with sudden cardiac death: evidence from the Rotterdam Study. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2009;18:4213–4218. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp356.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddp356) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2758139/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19643915/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hum.%20Mol.%20Genet&title=Genetic%20variation%20in%20NOS1AP%20is%20associated%20with%20sudden%20cardiac%20death:%20evidence%20from%20the%20Rotterdam%20Study&author=M%20Eijgelsheim&volume=18&publication_year=2009&pages=4213-4218&pmid=19643915&doi=10.1093/hmg/ddp356&)

31. Johnson AD, et al. SNAP: a web-based tool for identification and annotation of proxy SNPs using HapMap. Bioinformatics. 2008;24:2938–2939. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btn564.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btn564) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2720775/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18974171/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=SNAP:%20a%20web-based%20tool%20for%20identification%20and%20annotation%20of%20proxy%20SNPs%20using%20HapMap&author=AD%20Johnson&volume=24&publication_year=2008&pages=2938-2939&pmid=18974171&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btn564&)

32. Sampietro ML, et al. A genome wide association analysis in the GENDER study. Neth. Heart J. 2009;17:262–264. doi: 10.1007/BF03086261.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03086261) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2711253/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19789690/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neth.%20Heart%20J&title=A%20genome%20wide%20association%20analysis%20in%20the%20GENDER%20study&author=ML%20Sampietro&volume=17&publication_year=2009&pages=262-264&pmid=19789690&doi=10.1007/BF03086261&)

33. Agyemang C, et al. Prevalence, awareness, treatment, and control of hypertension among Black Surinamese, South Asian Surinamese and White Dutch in Amsterdam, The Netherlands: the SUNSET study. J. Hypertens. 2005;23:1971–1977. doi: 10.1097/01.hjh.0000186835.63996.d4.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.hjh.0000186835.63996.d4) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16208137/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Hypertens&title=Prevalence,%20awareness,%20treatment,%20and%20control%20of%20hypertension%20among%20Black%20Surinamese,%20South%20Asian%20Surinamese%20and%20White%20Dutch%20in%20Amsterdam,%20The%20Netherlands:%20the%20SUNSET%20study&author=C%20Agyemang&volume=23&publication_year=2005&pages=1971-1977&pmid=16208137&doi=10.1097/01.hjh.0000186835.63996.d4&)

34. Li Y, Mach Abecasis GR. 1.0: Rapid haplotype reconstruction and missing genotype inference. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2006;s79:2290.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Hum.%20Genet&title=1.0:%20Rapid%20haplotype%20reconstruction%20and%20missing%20genotype%20inference&author=Y%20Li&author=GR%20Mach%20Abecasis&volume=s79&publication_year=2006&pages=2290&)

35. Aulchenko YS, Ripke S, Isaacs A, van Duijn CM. GenABEL: an R library for genome-wide association analysis. Bioinformatics. 2007;23:1294–1296. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btm108.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btm108) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17384015/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=GenABEL:%20an%20R%20library%20for%20genome-wide%20association%20analysis&author=YS%20Aulchenko&author=S%20Ripke&author=A%20Isaacs&author=CM%20van%20Duijn&volume=23&publication_year=2007&pages=1294-1296&pmid=17384015&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btm108&)

36. Hoggart CJ, Clark TG, De IM, Whittaker JC, Balding DJ. Genome-wide significance for dense SNP and resequencing data. Genet. Epidemiol. 2008;32:179–185. doi: 10.1002/gepi.20292.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/gepi.20292) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18200594/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genet.%20Epidemiol&title=Genome-wide%20significance%20for%20dense%20SNP%20and%20resequencing%20data&author=CJ%20Hoggart&author=TG%20Clark&author=IM%20De&author=JC%20Whittaker&author=DJ%20Balding&volume=32&publication_year=2008&pages=179-185&pmid=18200594&doi=10.1002/gepi.20292&)
