# Common variants near ATM are associated with glycemic response to metformin in type 2 diabetes

## Metadata
**Authors:** Kaixin Zhou, Celine Bellenguez, Chris CA Spencer, Amanda J Bennett, Ruth L Coleman, Roger Tavendale, Simon A Hawley, Louise A Donnelly, Chris Schofield, Christopher J Groves, Lindsay Burch, Fiona Carr, Amy Strange, Colin Freeman, Jenefer M Blackwell, Elvira Bramon, Matthew A Brown, Juan P Casas, Aiden Corvin, Nicholas Craddock, Panos Deloukas, Serge Dronov, Audrey Duncanson, Sarah Edkins, Emma Gray, Sarah Hunt, Janusz Jankowski, Cordelia Langford, Hugh S Markus, Christopher G Mathew, Robert Plomin, Anna Rautanen, Stephen J Sawcer, Nilesh J Samani, Richard Trembath, Ananth C Viswanathan, Nicholas W Wood, MAGIC investigators, Lorna W Harries, Andrew T Hattersley, Alex SF Doney, Helen Colhoun, Andrew D Morris, Calum Sutherland, D Grahame Hardie, Leena Peltonen, Mark I McCarthy, Rury R Holman, Colin NA Palmer, Peter Donnelly, Ewan R Pearson, The GoDARTS and UKPDS Diabetes Pharmacogenetics Study Group, The Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium 2
**Journal:** Nature genetics
**Date:** 2010 Dec 26
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.735](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.735)
**PMID:** 21186350
**PMCID:** PMC3030919
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3030919/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3030919/pdf/ukmss-33681.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3030919/pdf/ukmss-33681.pdf)

## Abstract

Metformin is the most commonly used pharmacological therapy for type 2 diabetes. We carried out a GWA study on glycaemic response to metformin in 1024 Scottish patients with type 2 diabetes. Replication was in two cohorts consisting of 1783 Scottish patients and 1113 patients from the UK Prospective Diabetes Study. In a meta-analysis (n=3920) we observed an association (P=2.9 *10−9) for a SNP rs11212617 at a locus containing the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene with an odds ratio of 1.35 (95% CI 1.22 to 1.49) for treatment success. In a rat hepatoma cell line, inhibition of ATM with KU-55933 attenuated the phosphorylation and activation of AMPK in response to metformin. We conclude that ATM, a gene known to be involved in DNA repair and cell cycle control, plays a role in the effect of metformin upstream of AMPK, and variation in this gene alters glycaemic response to metformin.

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgements

We are grateful to all the participants who took part in this study, to the general practitioners, to the Scottish School of Primary Care for their help in recruiting the participants, and to the whole team, which includes interviewers, computer and laboratory technicians, clerical workers, research scientists, volunteers, managers, receptionists, and nurses. The Wellcome Trust provides support for Wellcome Trust United Kingdom Type 2 Diabetes Case Control Collection (GoDARTS) and informatics support is provided by the Chief Scientist Office. The Wellcome Trust funds the Scottish Health Informatics Programme, provides core support for the Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics in Oxford and funds the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium 2. This research was specifically funded by Diabetes UK (07/0003525), MRC (G0601261) and the Wellcome Trust (084726/Z/08/Z, 085475/Z/08/Z, 085475/B/08/Z). We also acknowledge support from the NIHR award to Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and University College London Institute of Ophthalmology for a Specialist Biomedical Research Centre for Ophthalmology (ACV). P. Donnelly was supported in part by a Wolfson–Royal Society Merit Award. KZ holds a Henry Wellcome Post-Doctoral Fellowship. SAH and DGH were supported by the EXGENESIS consortium (LSHM-CT-2004-005272) funded by the European Commission.

## Appendix

### On Line Methods

#### Samples

The discovery cohort and first replication cohort were both ascertained from the Diabetes Audit and Research Tayside Study (DARTS)[23](#R23). Validated prescribing data, biochemistry data as well as clinical phenotypes back to 1992 can be retrieved from central databases for all the DARTS patients. Prospective longitudinal data were also collected on these patients. Since October 1997, all patients with diabetes have been invited to give written informed consent to DNA as part of the Wellcome Trust United Kingdom Type 2 Diabetes case control collection. As of June 2009, 8000 cases and 7000 controls of European ancestry have participated in this Genetics of DARTS (GoDARTS) study.

As part of the WTCCC2, 4134 GoDARTS cases were selected primarily for a genome wide association study of statin response, but also for a study of response to oral hypoglycaemic agents (OHA). Following the WTCCC2 genotyping quality control (see below), 1024 patients were identified who were initiated on metformin and had a definable metformin response (discovery cohort). Of the GoDARTS cases not in the WTCCC2 discovery cohort metformin response could be defined in 1783 patients and this was used for the first round replication.

The second replication cohort was patients with type 2 diabetes either randomised to metformin, or treated with metformin as per protocol, in the UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS)[24](#R24). A total number of 1113 white European patients, who were exposed to metformin and passed the genotyping quality control, were identified in the UKPDS cohort. These were either primarily randomized to metformin (n=284), were randomized second line as add-in to sulphonylureas (n=231), or had metformin added to sulphonylurea per protocol for symptomatic hyperglycaemia or when fasting glucose was greater than 15mmol/L (n=598).

#### Phenotypes

Because over 92% of the OHA prescriptions issued in GoDARTS cohort are either metformin (51.4%) or sulphonylurea (41.2%), we focused on two treatment schemes of metformin monotherapy (metformin added in following failure of dietary control) or dual therapy (metformin added to stable sulphonylurea treatment).

Following initiation of oral hypoglycaemic agents in type 2 diabetes, there is an initial reduction in HbA1c, followed by a gradual deterioration. This can be seen in both the UKPDS study and other diabetes trials such as ADOPT[25](#R25). The gradual deterioration in HbA1c will reflect both drug efficacy (or inefficacy) to control HbA1c, and the underlying diabetes progression. To target the drug response alone we focused on the first 18 months of metformin therapy to minimize the response window but ensure minimal exclusion due to lack of HbA1c data.

In this observational study, the patient’s physician will be treating to achieve an HbA1c target, which over the majority of the study period would have been 7%. We therefore defined our primary drug response phenotype as a dichotomous trait of treatment success which was the ability to achieve an HbA1c below 7% in the first 18 months of treatment, with censoring if diabetes therapy was changed prior to this. Our secondary analysis took the quantitive phenotype as treatment HbA1c which was the lowest HbA1c observed between 1 and 18 months after metformin treatment or prior to a change in therapy (cessation of metformin or addition of further oral hypoglycaemic therapy).

The two phenotypes were modelled with multiple linear or logistic regression using the same set of covariates which includes baseline HbA1C, adherence, daily dose, creatinine clearance, baseline gap and treatment group. More details of the models and covariates were provided in supplementary methods.

In the UKPDS the HbA1c was measured yearly, and the HbA1c measure closest to 1 year after commencing metformin was taken as the treatment HbA1c. In the cases randomized to metformin this would have been approximately one year after starting metformin; in those starting metformin as per protocol due to hyperglycaemia the time between starting metformin and the treatment HbA1c was variable so an additional covariate (treatment gap) was included in the model. Treatment success was a treatment HbA1c <=7%. Other covariates included were as for the GoDARTS models, except adherence and dose were not included due to missing data.

Samples were genotyped at Affymetrix’s service laboratory on the Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0. Genotype data quality control was via the standard protocol that was established for the WTCCC2 studies[26](#R26) (supplementary methods). Specifically, concordance check was performed on 116 SNPs by 1779 individuals overlapped between this GWA data and the WTCCC1 T2D case control study[27](#R27). Based on the concordance rate of 99.73%, individuals with more than 10% discordance were removed from the current study. After such stringent QC, the clean data set included 705125 autosomal SNPs on 3736 samples, of whom 1024 have definable metformin response.

In the first round replication, following assay optimization of the top two SNPs from the GWA (rs11212617 and rs624366, r^2^=0.997 in 3736 GoDARTS samples), rs11212617 had better genotyping performance and was genotyped by the standard Taqman-based allelic discrimination method (Applied Biosystems) in the whole GoDARTS cohort, which included 7000 non-diabetic controls. The overall call rate was 98.3% with a concordance rate of 99.9% to the GWA genotypes. There was no deviation from Hardy Weinberg Equilibrium (p=0.44). Minor allele C had a frequency of 43.9% in the 1783 GoDARTS replication sample.

Taqman was also used for genotyping the UKPDS replication sample. Following optimization of 4 highly correlated SNPs (rs11212617 and rs624366 as well as two proxies rs609261 and rs2345801) in a subset of UKPDS samples, SNP rs609261 was selected and genotyped based on better genotyping performance than the other SNPs. rs609261 is almost a perfect proxy for rs11212617 (r^2^=0.997 in 5197 WTCCC2 controls) and as such, results are presented as for rs11212617 in the UKPDS cohort. Genotyping of all available UKPDS DNAs (n=3400) was carried out in duplicate using standard conditions. Discrepancy between the duplicate genotyping runs was 0.4%, and only samples for which the duplicate genotypes were concordant were analysed. The final UKPDS replication cohort included 1113 Caucasian patients and the minor allele frequency was 42.1% with no deviation from HWE (p=0.98).

Logistic and linear regression modelling was performed with PLINK and SNPTEST[28](#R28),[29](#R29) assuming an additive genetic model. All the results presented were unadjusted for population stratification as a genomic inflation factor of 1.003 and 0.998 was observed for logistic and linear regression analyzes respectively.

Data from the discovery cohort were also imputed to the HapMap II CEU panel of 2.2 million SNPs with program IMPUTE and tested for association with SNPTest taking into account the imputed genotype probabilities[30](#R30).

As the two SNPs rs11212617 and rs609261 that were genotyped in the Go-DARTS sample and the UKPDS sample respectively were in near complete LD (r^2^=0.997), we directly combined the single marker association test results from the discovery cohort and the two replication cohorts with the inverse variance fixed effect method as implemented in the R package of GenABEL[31](#R31).

#### Functional studies

KU-55933 is a cell-permeable ATP-competitive inhibitor of *ATM* (IC_50_ = 13 nM; Ki = 2.2 nM) with selectivity over other PIKK family *kinase*s (IC50 = 2.5, 9.3, 16.6 μM for DNA-PK, mTOR, PI 3-K, respectively; IC50 > 100 μM for PI 4-K and ATR)[32](#R32). It is reported to have little activity towards a panel of 70 conventional serine/threonine kinases. It has been shown to inhibit *ATM*-dependent cellular protein phosphorylation following ionizing radiation (IR) and sensitizes cells that express wild-type *ATM* (but not mutant *ATM*) to the cytotoxic effects of IR and DNA-damaging agents[33](#R33),[34](#R34).

H4IIE cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium containing 5% (v/v) fetal bovine serum to 80% confluence. For AMPK assays, cells were pretreated with 10 μM KU55933 (30 min) prior to treatment with various concentrations of metformin for 1 hr. Lysates were prepared (rapid lysis method[35](#R35)), centrifuged (4°C, 10 min 21,000 x g), and the supernatants frozen for later analysis. AMPK activity was assayed in immunoprecipitates as described[35](#R35) using the AMARA peptide[36](#R36).

To establish that the change in AMPK activity was due to regulation of phosphorylation of AMPK and that this translated into changes in substrate phosphorylation, we used Western Blotting to compare the phosphorylation status of Thr-172 of AMPK and Ser-79 of ACC (a well characterized marker of AMPK activation). In both cases metformin induced phosphorylation was partially reduced ([Figure 3](#F3)).

For these experiments, H4IIE cells were cultured to 80% confluence as above, then serum starved for 16 hr, pretreated with KU55933 or vehicle (DMSO) for 1 hr then treated for 3 hr with or without metformin. They were harvested as above. Proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose. The membrane was blocked in TBST containing 5% milk for 1 hour, then incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-phospho-Thr172-AMPK antibody (Cell Signaling, Beverly, MA), anti-phospho-Ser79 ACC antibody (Cell Signaling) or anti-β-actin antibody (Sigma, Dorset, UK). Membranes were washed in TBST, incubated with goat anti-rabbit IgG conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (Pierce, Chester, UK) then washed again in TBST. The membrane was then developed using an ECL Western Blotting Detection Kit (Amersham Biosciences) before exposure to X-Ray film (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA).

## Footnotes

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Supplementary Materials

### Supplementary Materials

## References

1. Nathan DM, et al. Medical management of hyperglycaemia in type 2 diabetes mellitus: a consensus algorithm for the initiation and adjustment of therapy : A consensus statement from the American Diabetes Association and the European Association for the Study of Diabetes. Diabetologia. 2009;52:17–30. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1157-y.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-008-1157-y) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18941734/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetologia&title=Medical%20management%20of%20hyperglycaemia%20in%20type%202%20diabetes%20mellitus:%20a%20consensus%20algorithm%20for%20the%20initiation%20and%20adjustment%20of%20therapy%20:%20A%20consensus%20statement%20from%20the%20American%20Diabetes%20Association%20and%20the%20European%20Association%20for%20the%20Study%20of%20Diabetes&author=DM%20Nathan&volume=52&publication_year=2009&pages=17-30&pmid=18941734&doi=10.1007/s00125-008-1157-y&)

2. NICE clinical guideline 87 . Type 2 diabetes: the management of type 2 diabetes. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence; 2009.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Type%202%20diabetes:%20the%20management%20of%20type%202%20diabetes&publication_year=2009&)

3. Zhou G, et al. Role of AMP-activated protein kinase in mechanism of metformin action. J Clin Invest. 2001;108:1167–1174. doi: 10.1172/JCI13505.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI13505) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC209533/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11602624/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Invest&title=Role%20of%20AMP-activated%20protein%20kinase%20in%20mechanism%20of%20metformin%20action&author=G%20Zhou&volume=108&publication_year=2001&pages=1167-1174&pmid=11602624&doi=10.1172/JCI13505&)

4. Owen MR, Doran E, Halestrap AP. Evidence that metformin exerts its anti-diabetic effects through inhibition of complex 1 of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Biochem J. 2000;348(Pt 3):607–614.  [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1221104/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10839993/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biochem%20J&title=Evidence%20that%20metformin%20exerts%20its%20anti-diabetic%20effects%20through%20inhibition%20of%20complex%201%20of%20the%20mitochondrial%20respiratory%20chain&author=MR%20Owen&author=E%20Doran&author=AP%20Halestrap&volume=348&issue=Pt%203&publication_year=2000&pages=607-614&pmid=10839993&)

5. Hawley SA, et al. Use of cells expressing gamma subunit variants to identify diverse mechanisms of AMPK activation. Cell Metab. 2010;11:554–565. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2010.04.001.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2010.04.001) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2935965/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20519126/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Metab&title=Use%20of%20cells%20expressing%20gamma%20subunit%20variants%20to%20identify%20diverse%20mechanisms%20of%20AMPK%20activation&author=SA%20Hawley&volume=11&publication_year=2010&pages=554-565&pmid=20519126&doi=10.1016/j.cmet.2010.04.001&)

6. Donnelly LA, Doney AS, Hattersley AT, Morris AD, Pearson ER. The effect of obesity on glycaemic response to metformin or sulphonylureas in Type 2 diabetes. Diabet Med. 2006;23:128–133. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2005.01755.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1464-5491.2005.01755.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16433709/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabet%20Med&title=The%20effect%20of%20obesity%20on%20glycaemic%20response%20to%20metformin%20or%20sulphonylureas%20in%20Type%202%20diabetes&author=LA%20Donnelly&author=AS%20Doney&author=AT%20Hattersley&author=AD%20Morris&author=ER%20Pearson&volume=23&publication_year=2006&pages=128-133&pmid=16433709&doi=10.1111/j.1464-5491.2005.01755.x&)

7. Dupuis J, et al. New genetic loci implicated in fasting glucose homeostasis and their impact on type 2 diabetes risk. Nat Genet. 2010;42:105–116. doi: 10.1038/ng.520.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.520) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3018764/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20081858/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=New%20genetic%20loci%20implicated%20in%20fasting%20glucose%20homeostasis%20and%20their%20impact%20on%20type%202%20diabetes%20risk&author=J%20Dupuis&volume=42&publication_year=2010&pages=105-116&pmid=20081858&doi=10.1038/ng.520&)

8. Boder E. Ataxia-telangiectasia: an overview. Kroc Found Ser. 1985;19:1–63.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2415689/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Kroc%20Found%20Ser&title=Ataxia-telangiectasia:%20an%20overview&author=E%20Boder&volume=19&publication_year=1985&pages=1-63&pmid=2415689&)

9. Schalch DS, McFarlin DE, Barlow MH. An unusual form of diabetes mellitus in ataxia telangiectasia. N Engl J Med. 1970;282:1396–1402. doi: 10.1056/NEJM197006182822503.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM197006182822503) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/4192270/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N%20Engl%20J%20Med&title=An%20unusual%20form%20of%20diabetes%20mellitus%20in%20ataxia%20telangiectasia&author=DS%20Schalch&author=DE%20McFarlin&author=MH%20Barlow&volume=282&publication_year=1970&pages=1396-1402&pmid=4192270&doi=10.1056/NEJM197006182822503&)

10. Bar RS, et al. Extreme insulin resistance in ataxia telangiectasia: defect in affinity of insulin receptors. N Engl J Med. 1978;298:1164–1171. doi: 10.1056/NEJM197805252982103.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM197805252982103) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/651946/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N%20Engl%20J%20Med&title=Extreme%20insulin%20resistance%20in%20ataxia%20telangiectasia:%20defect%20in%20affinity%20of%20insulin%20receptors&author=RS%20Bar&volume=298&publication_year=1978&pages=1164-1171&pmid=651946&doi=10.1056/NEJM197805252982103&)

11. Sun Y, Connors KE, Yang DQ. AICAR induces phosphorylation of AMPK in an ATM-dependent, LKB1-independent manner. Mol Cell Biochem. 2007;306:239–245. doi: 10.1007/s11010-007-9575-6.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11010-007-9575-6) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17786544/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Cell%20Biochem&title=AICAR%20induces%20phosphorylation%20of%20AMPK%20in%20an%20ATM-dependent,%20LKB1-independent%20manner&author=Y%20Sun&author=KE%20Connors&author=DQ%20Yang&volume=306&publication_year=2007&pages=239-245&pmid=17786544&doi=10.1007/s11010-007-9575-6&)

12. Fu X, Wan S, Lyu YL, Liu LF, Qi H. Etoposide induces ATM-dependent mitochondrial biogenesis through AMPK activation. PLoS One. 2008;3:e2009. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002009.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0002009) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2329593/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18431490/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20One&title=Etoposide%20induces%20ATM-dependent%20mitochondrial%20biogenesis%20through%20AMPK%20activation&author=X%20Fu&author=S%20Wan&author=YL%20Lyu&author=LF%20Liu&author=H%20Qi&volume=3&publication_year=2008&pages=e2009&pmid=18431490&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0002009&)

13. Sanli T, et al. Ionizing radiation activates AMP-activated kinase (AMPK): a target for radiosensitization of human cancer cells. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;78:221–229. doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.03.005.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.03.005) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20615625/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int%20J%20Radiat%20Oncol%20Biol%20Phys&title=Ionizing%20radiation%20activates%20AMP-activated%20kinase%20(AMPK):%20a%20target%20for%20radiosensitization%20of%20human%20cancer%20cells&author=T%20Sanli&volume=78&publication_year=2010&pages=221-229&pmid=20615625&doi=10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.03.005&)

14. Lavin MF. Ataxia-telangiectasia: from a rare disorder to a paradigm for cell signalling and cancer. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2008;9:759–769. doi: 10.1038/nrm2514.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm2514) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18813293/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Rev%20Mol%20Cell%20Biol&title=Ataxia-telangiectasia:%20from%20a%20rare%20disorder%20to%20a%20paradigm%20for%20cell%20signalling%20and%20cancer&author=MF%20Lavin&volume=9&publication_year=2008&pages=759-769&pmid=18813293&doi=10.1038/nrm2514&)

15. Schneider JG, et al. ATM-dependent suppression of stress signaling reduces vascular disease in metabolic syndrome. Cell Metab. 2006;4:377–389. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2006.10.002.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2006.10.002) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17084711/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Metab&title=ATM-dependent%20suppression%20of%20stress%20signaling%20reduces%20vascular%20disease%20in%20metabolic%20syndrome&author=JG%20Schneider&volume=4&publication_year=2006&pages=377-389&pmid=17084711&doi=10.1016/j.cmet.2006.10.002&)

16. Miles PD, Treuner K, Latronica M, Olefsky JM, Barlow C. Impaired insulin secretion in a mouse model of ataxia telangiectasia. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2007;293:E70–74. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00259.2006.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpendo.00259.2006) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17356010/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Physiol%20Endocrinol%20Metab&title=Impaired%20insulin%20secretion%20in%20a%20mouse%20model%20of%20ataxia%20telangiectasia&author=PD%20Miles&author=K%20Treuner&author=M%20Latronica&author=JM%20Olefsky&author=C%20Barlow&volume=293&publication_year=2007&pages=E70-74&pmid=17356010&doi=10.1152/ajpendo.00259.2006&)

17. Trinklein ND, Aldred SJ, Saldanha AJ, Myers RM. Identification and functional analysis of human transcriptional promoters. Genome Res. 2003;13:308–312. doi: 10.1101/gr.794803.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.794803) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC420378/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12566409/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Res&title=Identification%20and%20functional%20analysis%20of%20human%20transcriptional%20promoters&author=ND%20Trinklein&author=SJ%20Aldred&author=AJ%20Saldanha&author=RM%20Myers&volume=13&publication_year=2003&pages=308-312&pmid=12566409&doi=10.1101/gr.794803&)

18. Fukao T, et al. ATM is upregulated during the mitogenic response in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Blood. 1999;94:1998–2006.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10477729/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Blood&title=ATM%20is%20upregulated%20during%20the%20mitogenic%20response%20in%20peripheral%20blood%20mononuclear%20cells&author=T%20Fukao&volume=94&publication_year=1999&pages=1998-2006&pmid=10477729&)

19. Savitsky K, et al. Ataxia-telangiectasia: structural diversity of untranslated sequences suggests complex post-transcriptional regulation of ATM gene expression. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997;25:1678–1684. doi: 10.1093/nar/25.9.1678.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/25.9.1678) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC146671/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9108147/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res&title=Ataxia-telangiectasia:%20structural%20diversity%20of%20untranslated%20sequences%20suggests%20complex%20post-transcriptional%20regulation%20of%20ATM%20gene%20expression&author=K%20Savitsky&volume=25&publication_year=1997&pages=1678-1684&pmid=9108147&doi=10.1093/nar/25.9.1678&)

20. Gudmundsson J, et al. Two variants on chromosome 17 confer prostate cancer risk, and the one in TCF2 protects against type 2 diabetes. Nat Genet. 2007;39:977–983. doi: 10.1038/ng2062.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng2062) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17603485/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=Two%20variants%20on%20chromosome%2017%20confer%20prostate%20cancer%20risk,%20and%20the%20one%20in%20TCF2%20protects%20against%20type%202%20diabetes&author=J%20Gudmundsson&volume=39&publication_year=2007&pages=977-983&pmid=17603485&doi=10.1038/ng2062&)

21. Libby G, et al. New users of metformin are at low risk of incident cancer: a cohort study among people with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2009;32:1620–1625. doi: 10.2337/dc08-2175.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/dc08-2175) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2732153/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19564453/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes%20Care&title=New%20users%20of%20metformin%20are%20at%20low%20risk%20of%20incident%20cancer:%20a%20cohort%20study%20among%20people%20with%20type%202%20diabetes&author=G%20Libby&volume=32&publication_year=2009&pages=1620-1625&pmid=19564453&doi=10.2337/dc08-2175&)

22. Huang X, et al. Important role of the LKB1-AMPK pathway in suppressing tumorigenesis in PTEN-deficient mice. Biochem J. 2008;412:211–221. doi: 10.1042/BJ20080557.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20080557) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18387000/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biochem%20J&title=Important%20role%20of%20the%20LKB1-AMPK%20pathway%20in%20suppressing%20tumorigenesis%20in%20PTEN-deficient%20mice&author=X%20Huang&volume=412&publication_year=2008&pages=211-221&pmid=18387000&doi=10.1042/BJ20080557&)

23. Morris AD, et al. The diabetes audit and research in Tayside Scotland (DARTS) study: electronic record linkage to create a diabetes register. DARTS/MEMO Collaboration. Bmj. 1997;315:524–528. doi: 10.1136/bmj.315.7107.524.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.315.7107.524) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2127363/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9329309/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bmj&title=The%20diabetes%20audit%20and%20research%20in%20Tayside%20Scotland%20(DARTS)%20study:%20electronic%20record%20linkage%20to%20create%20a%20diabetes%20register.%20DARTS/MEMO%20Collaboration&author=AD%20Morris&volume=315&publication_year=1997&pages=524-528&pmid=9329309&doi=10.1136/bmj.315.7107.524&)

24. Effect of intensive blood-glucose control with metformin on complications in overweight patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 34). UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Lancet. 1998;352:854–865.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9742977/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Lancet&title=Effect%20of%20intensive%20blood-glucose%20control%20with%20metformin%20on%20complications%20in%20overweight%20patients%20with%20type%202%20diabetes%20(UKPDS%2034).%20UK%20Prospective%20Diabetes%20Study%20(UKPDS)%20Group&volume=352&publication_year=1998&pages=854-865&pmid=9742977&)

25. Kahn SE, et al. Glycemic durability of rosiglitazone, metformin, or glyburide monotherapy. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:2427–2443. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa066224.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa066224) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17145742/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N%20Engl%20J%20Med&title=Glycemic%20durability%20of%20rosiglitazone,%20metformin,%20or%20glyburide%20monotherapy&author=SE%20Kahn&volume=355&publication_year=2006&pages=2427-2443&pmid=17145742&doi=10.1056/NEJMoa066224&)

26. Barrett JC, et al. Genome-wide association study of ulcerative colitis identifies three new susceptibility loci, including the HNF4A region. Nat Genet. 2009;41:1330–1334. doi: 10.1038/ng.483.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.483) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2812019/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19915572/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=Genome-wide%20association%20study%20of%20ulcerative%20colitis%20identifies%20three%20new%20susceptibility%20loci,%20including%20the%20HNF4A%20region&author=JC%20Barrett&volume=41&publication_year=2009&pages=1330-1334&pmid=19915572&doi=10.1038/ng.483&)

27. Zeggini E, et al. Replication of genome-wide association signals in UK samples reveals risk loci for type 2 diabetes. Science. 2007;316:1336–1341. doi: 10.1126/science.1142364.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1142364) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3772310/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17463249/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=Replication%20of%20genome-wide%20association%20signals%20in%20UK%20samples%20reveals%20risk%20loci%20for%20type%202%20diabetes&author=E%20Zeggini&volume=316&publication_year=2007&pages=1336-1341&pmid=17463249&doi=10.1126/science.1142364&)

28. Marchini J, Howie B, Myers S, McVean G, Donnelly P. A new multipoint method for genome-wide association studies by imputation of genotypes. Nat Genet. 2007;39:906–913. doi: 10.1038/ng2088.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng2088) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17572673/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=A%20new%20multipoint%20method%20for%20genome-wide%20association%20studies%20by%20imputation%20of%20genotypes&author=J%20Marchini&author=B%20Howie&author=S%20Myers&author=G%20McVean&author=P%20Donnelly&volume=39&publication_year=2007&pages=906-913&pmid=17572673&doi=10.1038/ng2088&)

29. Purcell S, et al. PLINK: a tool set for whole-genome association and population-based linkage analyses. Am J Hum Genet. 2007;81:559–575. doi: 10.1086/519795.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/519795) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1950838/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17701901/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Hum%20Genet&title=PLINK:%20a%20tool%20set%20for%20whole-genome%20association%20and%20population-based%20linkage%20analyses&author=S%20Purcell&volume=81&publication_year=2007&pages=559-575&pmid=17701901&doi=10.1086/519795&)

30. Howie BN, Donnelly P, Marchini J. A flexible and accurate genotype imputation method for the next generation of genome-wide association studies. PLoS Genet. 2009;5:e1000529. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000529.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000529) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2689936/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19543373/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Genet&title=A%20flexible%20and%20accurate%20genotype%20imputation%20method%20for%20the%20next%20generation%20of%20genome-wide%20association%20studies&author=BN%20Howie&author=P%20Donnelly&author=J%20Marchini&volume=5&publication_year=2009&pages=e1000529&pmid=19543373&doi=10.1371/journal.pgen.1000529&)

31. Aulchenko YS, Ripke S, Isaacs A, van Duijn CM. GenABEL: an R library for genome-wide association analysis. Bioinformatics. 2007;23:1294–1296. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btm108.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btm108) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17384015/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=GenABEL:%20an%20R%20library%20for%20genome-wide%20association%20analysis&author=YS%20Aulchenko&author=S%20Ripke&author=A%20Isaacs&author=CM%20van%20Duijn&volume=23&publication_year=2007&pages=1294-1296&pmid=17384015&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btm108&)

32. Hickson I, et al. Identification and characterization of a novel and specific inhibitor of the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated kinase ATM. Cancer Res. 2004;64:9152–9159. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-2727.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-2727) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15604286/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Res&title=Identification%20and%20characterization%20of%20a%20novel%20and%20specific%20inhibitor%20of%20the%20ataxia-telangiectasia%20mutated%20kinase%20ATM&author=I%20Hickson&volume=64&publication_year=2004&pages=9152-9159&pmid=15604286&doi=10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-2727&)

33. Eaton JS, Lin ZP, Sartorelli AC, Bonawitz ND, Shadel GS. Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated kinase regulates ribonucleotide reductase and mitochondrial homeostasis. J. Clin. Invest. 2007;117:2723–2734. doi: 10.1172/JCI31604.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI31604) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1952633/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17786248/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Clin.%20Invest&title=Ataxia-telangiectasia%20mutated%20kinase%20regulates%20ribonucleotide%20reductase%20and%20mitochondrial%20homeostasis&author=JS%20Eaton&author=ZP%20Lin&author=AC%20Sartorelli&author=ND%20Bonawitz&author=GS%20Shadel&volume=117&publication_year=2007&pages=2723-2734&pmid=17786248&doi=10.1172/JCI31604&)

34. Crescenzi E, Palumbo G, de Boer J, Brady HJ. Ataxia telangiectasia mutated and p21CIP1 modulate cell survival of drug-induced senescent tumor cells: implications for chemotherapy. Clin. Cancer Res. 2008;14:1877–1887. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-4298.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-4298) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18347191/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin.%20Cancer%20Res&title=Ataxia%20telangiectasia%20mutated%20and%20p21CIP1%20modulate%20cell%20survival%20of%20drug-induced%20senescent%20tumor%20cells:%20implications%20for%20chemotherapy&author=E%20Crescenzi&author=G%20Palumbo&author=J%20de%20Boer&author=HJ%20Brady&volume=14&publication_year=2008&pages=1877-1887&pmid=18347191&doi=10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-4298&)

35. Hardie DG, Salt IP, Davies SP. Analysis of the role of the AMP-activated protein kinase in the response to cellular stress. Methods Mol. Biol. 2000;99:63–75. doi: 10.1385/1-59259-054-3:63.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1385/1-59259-054-3:63) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10909077/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Methods%20Mol.%20Biol&title=Analysis%20of%20the%20role%20of%20the%20AMP-activated%20protein%20kinase%20in%20the%20response%20to%20cellular%20stress&author=DG%20Hardie&author=IP%20Salt&author=SP%20Davies&volume=99&publication_year=2000&pages=63-75&pmid=10909077&doi=10.1385/1-59259-054-3:63&)

36. Dale S, Wilson WA, Edelman AM, Hardie DG. Similar substrate recognition motifs for mammalian AMP-activated protein kinase, higher plant HMG-CoA reductase kinase-A, yeast SNF1, and mammalian calmodulin-dependent protein kinase I. FEBS Lett. 1995;361:191–195. doi: 10.1016/0014-5793(95)00172-6.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0014-5793(95)00172-6) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7698321/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=FEBS%20Lett&title=Similar%20substrate%20recognition%20motifs%20for%20mammalian%20AMP-activated%20protein%20kinase,%20higher%20plant%20HMG-CoA%20reductase%20kinase-A,%20yeast%20SNF1,%20and%20mammalian%20calmodulin-dependent%20protein%20kinase%20I&author=S%20Dale&author=WA%20Wilson&author=AM%20Edelman&author=DG%20Hardie&volume=361&publication_year=1995&pages=191-195&pmid=7698321&doi=10.1016/0014-5793(95)00172-6&)
