# Association between Recent Acetaminophen Use and Asthma: Modification by Polymorphism at TLR4

## Metadata
**Authors:** Seung-Hwa Lee, Mi-Jin Kang, Ho-Sung Yu, Kyungmo Hong, Young-Ho Jung, Hyung-Young Kim, Ju-Hee Seo, Ji-Won Kwon, Byoung-Ju Kim, Ha-Jung Kim, Young-Joon Kim, Hee-Suk Kim, Hyo Bin Kim, Kang Seo Park, So-Yeon Lee, Soo-Jong Hong
**Journal:** Journal of Korean Medical Science
**Date:** 2014 Apr 25
**DOI:** [10.3346/jkms.2014.29.5.662](https://doi.org/10.3346/jkms.2014.29.5.662)
**PMID:** 24851022
**PMCID:** PMC4024959
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4024959/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4024959/pdf/jkms-29-662.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4024959/pdf/jkms-29-662.pdf)

## Abstract

**Graphical Abstract:** 
Keywords: Acetaminophen, Asthma, Bronchial Hyperresponsiveness, Toll-Like Receptor 4, Gene-Environment Interaction

### Graphical Abstract

## INTRODUCTION

Asthma is the most common chronic inflammatory disease of the airways and is a complex disorder entailing both environmental and genetic factors ([1](#B1)). Various studies have proposed several risk factors for the development of asthma in children, such as exposure to allergen, parental tobacco smoke, air pollution, and oxidative stress. In asthma, exposure to triggers has been associated with innate immune activation including increased expression of interleukin (IL)-8, IL-1β and major receptors, such as Toll-like receptor (TLR)2, and TLR4, leading to production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) ([2](#B2), [3](#B3)).

A recent worldwide study showed that exposure to acetaminophen in the intrauterine environment, infancy, childhood, and adult life as significantly increasing the risk of asthma that being so acetaminophen usage is one of the most convincing candidates for influencing asthma development in children ([4](#B4), [5](#B5), [6](#B6), [7](#B7)).

Acetaminophen is a potential source of oxidative stress ([6](#B6), [8](#B8)) and many studies have provided evidence indicating a rise in oxidative stress in asthma ([9](#B9)). Oxidative stress produced by ROS has been associated with airway inflammation, bronchial hyperresponsiveness (BHR) ([10](#B10)), and stimulation of inflammatory cells ([11](#B11), [12](#B12), [13](#B13)). Some studies have suggested that acetaminophen ingestion results in a decline in antioxidants (such as glutathione), and related this to the adverse effects observed in asthma ([11](#B11), [14](#B14), [15](#B15)). In addition, in our previous study, we demonstrated that ROS-related gene polymorphisms were significantly associated with the relationship between acetaminophen (paracetamol) use and asthma ([16](#B16)).

Polymorphisms in the *TLR4* gene may play a role in the development of allergic airway inflammation ([17](#B17)). Several studies have indicated that specific polymorphisms at *TLR4* (rs4986790 and rs1927911) were associated with asthma ([18](#B18), [19](#B19), [20](#B20)). In addition, it was previously suggested that the *TLR4* polymorphisms, rs4986790 and rs4986791, are associated with an altered response to endotoxin, modifying the risk of asthma ([17](#B17)). In particular, a further study reported that the *TLR4* polymorphism, rs1927911, is associated with the influence of increased exposure to fine particulate matter (PM_2.5_) levels in childhood doctor-diagnosed asthma ([18](#B18)).

Therefore, we investigated whether recent acetaminophen usage was associated with asthma or BHR and if there was an association between polymorphism at *TLR4* (rs1927911) and asthma or BHR.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Study participants

In this study, we recruited a total of 2,428 school children aged 8-13 yr from two cross-sectional surveys, in nine elementary schools of Seoul and Jeongeup cities in Korea ([21](#B21)). Children were ineligible to participate in the study if they suffered from a chronic or immune disease, or had used steroid or antihistamine medication in the 4 weeks before the test.

### ISAAC questionnaire

Questions were taken from the International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood (ISAAC). The written questionnaire was translated into Korean according to the ISAAC protocol. The questionnaire was used to determine the prevalence of symptoms and diagnosis of allergic diseases, demographic factors, and potential explanatory and confounding factors. Questionnaires were distributed and collected from July to October of 2008.

The questionnaire was composed of three main sections: 1) general characteristics including date of birth, sex, height, and weight; 2) a history of symptoms related to allergic disease, including asthma; 3) exposure to environmental factors associated with allergic disease. Parents completed the Korean version of the ISAAC questionnaire.

Prevalence of asthma was categorised as follows: "asthma diagnosis ever" (individuals who had been diagnosed with asthma in their lifetime) and "current asthma" (children included in the "asthma diagnosis ever" category who had experienced symptoms within the 12 months before completing the survey). Use of acetaminophen was defined as taking the medication for more than 3 days within the 12 months before the survey.

### Measurement of bronchial hyperresponsiveness

The methacholine challenge test was executed using a dosimeter with a concentration range of 0.625-25 mg/mL. A spirometer (Microspiro HI298, Tokyo, Japan) was used to measure the forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV_1_) after each inhalation. Bronchial hyperresponsiveness (BHR) to methacholine was defined as a PC_20_ (the concentration of methacholine required to provoke a 20% reduction in FEV_1_)≤16 mg/mL.

### Measurement of eosinophils and total IgE

The percentage of blood eosinophils was evaluated (Coulter Counter, STKS; Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA, USA). Serum total immunoglobulin E (IgE) was measured by fluorescent enzyme immunoassay using the ImmunoCAP system (Phadia AB, Uppsala, Sweden).

### Genotyping

Genomic DNA was obtained from peripheral blood of the subjects using the Gentra Puregene Blood kit (Qiagen sciences, Germantown, MD, USA). Genotyping of the *TLR4* polymorphism, rs1927911 was performed using a TaqMan assay (Assay ID, C_ 11722141_10; ABI, Foster City, CA, USA), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Endpoint readings were performed on an ABI PRISM 7900 HT Sequence Detection System (ABI).

### Statistical analyses

Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS version 20.0 (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Results are presented with 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs). Logistic regression analyses were performed to calculate adjusted odds ratios (aORs) for associations between asthma and independent risk factors. The interactions between *TLR4* polymorphism and asthma were evaluated by multivariate logistic regression analysis. The effect of use of acetaminophen on the development of asthma in context of the polymorphic genotype at *TLR4* was also determined. In multivariate analyses, adjustments were made for the study participants age, sex, and body mass index (BMI), parental asthma as a familial factor, and family income as socioeconomic factor, and environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) as an environmental factor. For all analyses, a *P* value<0.05 was regarded as statistically significant.

### Ethics statement

Approval to conduct the study was obtained from the institutional review boards of Hallym University and University of Ulsan College of Medicine (IRB number: 2008-0208), and from the principals of the schools attended by the children. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents or guardians of all children.

## RESULTS

### Population characteristics and prevalence of asthma

The demographic data of the 2,428 children participating in this study are presented in [Table 1](#T1). Their mean age was 10.31±1.61 yr. The proportion of males was 52.17%. A parental history of asthma was observed in 3.56% of the study population. Exposure to environmental tobacco smoking was indicated in 42.58% of children. The usage of acetaminophen was reported for 53.33% of the subjects. Asthma had been diagnosed by a doctor in 9.07% of the children. Positive BHR (PC_20_≤16) was present in 12.09% of the subjects.

### Table 1.

Table 1 Caption: General characteristics of the study subjects

### Risk factors for asthma

Use of acetaminophen in the last 12 months was associated with risk of BHR (aOR, 1.47; 95% CI, 1.08-2.00, *P*=0.01), but was not significantly associated with either asthma diagnosis ever or current asthma ([Table 2](#T2)). Family history of asthma increased the risk of asthma diagnosis ever (aOR, 1.97; 95% CI, 1.01-3.86, *P*=0.05), current asthma (aOR, 2.87; 95% CI, 1.11-7.42, *P*=0.03), and BHR (aOR, 1.99; 95% CI, 1.04-3.78, *P*=0.04) ([Table 2](#T2)).

### Table 2.

Table 2 Caption: Associations between acetaminophen use, family history and Toll-like receptor 4 polymorphism, rs1927911, on asthma or BHR

The frequencies of CC, CT, and TT of *TLR4* polymorphism were 26.0%, 35.3%, and 12.1%, respectively. Analysis of association between the *TLR4* polymorphism, rs1927911, and asthma indicated no association between the genotypes (CT+TT) and asthma diagnosis ever, current asthma, or BHR ([Table 2](#T2)) compared to the homozygous reference allele (CC genotype).

### Association between acetaminophen use and family history of asthma

The use of acetaminophen, combined with family history of asthma, was significantly associated with asthma diagnosis ever and current asthma (aOR, 2.55; 95% CI, 1.09-6.00, *P*=0.03; aOR, 4.64; 95% CI, 1.48-14.56, *P*=0.01, respectively); however, neither use of acetaminophen in the absence of family history of asthma, nor lack of use of acetaminophen in the presence of family history of asthma were associated with asthma diagnosis ever or current asthma ([Table 3](#T3)). Our results also indicated that acetaminophen use, with or without family history of asthma, was associated with BHR (aOR, 2.63; 95% CI, 1.11-6.22, *P*=0.03; aOR, 1.49; 95% CI, 1.09-2.05, *P*=0.01, respectively). Although subjects who had a family history of asthma but had not used acetaminophen showed a tendency towards increased risk for BHR, this was not significant (aOR, 2.31; 95% CI, 0.87-6.15, *P*=0.09) ([Table 3](#T3)).

### Table 3.

Table 3 Caption: Combined associations between acetaminophen usage and family history on asthma or BHR

### Combined effects of acetaminophen use and the TLR4 polymorphism, rs1927911

Analysis of association between use of acetaminophen and *TLR4* polymorphism on asthma indicated that a combination of CT+TT genotype and acetaminophen use was significantly associated with asthma diagnosis ever (aOR, 2.08; 95% CI, 1.10-3.92, *P*=0.02), when compared to the CC genotype in the absence of acetaminophen use. Conversely, neither the CT+TT genotype in the absence of acetaminophen use, nor the CC genotype with acetaminophen were related to asthma diagnosis ever ([Table 4](#T4)). In addition, the CT+TT genotype in combination with acetaminophen usage was associated with BHR (aOR, 1.74; 95% CI, 1.03-2.94, *P*=0.04); whereas neither the CT+TT genotype without, nor the CC genotype with, acetaminophen usage were associated with BHR. No significant association was observed between *TLR4* polymorphism and acetaminophen use for current asthma ([Table 4](#T4)).

### Table 4.

Table 4 Caption: Combined associations between acetaminophen usage and Toll-like receptor4 polymorphism, rs1927911, on asthma or BHR

## DISCUSSION

In this study, we identified that acetaminophen use within the past 12 months was associated with asthma in children. The presence of a family history of asthma also increased the risk of asthma in children and this notably increased with use of acetaminophen. We analysed these risk factors in the context of *TLR4* gene polymorphism to identify any associations with asthma. We found that acetaminophen use was associated with asthma and BHR in children with CT+TT genotypes at the *TLR4* polymorphism, rs1927911. These findings suggest that the risk of asthma might be increased in susceptible subjects exposed to the acetaminophen use.

Previous epidemiologic studies have reported that usage of acetaminophen in the prenatal period, infancy, and childhood is associated with an increased risk of asthma in children ([4](#B4), [7](#B7), [22](#B22), [23](#B23), [24](#B24)). The ISAAC study reported that the use of acetaminophen in the first year of life was associated with an increased risk of asthma and that acetaminophen usage in the past 12 months was associated with an increased risk of asthma symptoms in children aged 6 to 7 yr ([24](#B24)). Furthermore, in a population-based case-control study in the United Kingdom, acetaminophen use was positively associated with asthma in subjects aged 16-49 yr ([25](#B25)), and a New Zealand study found that acetaminophen use in the past 12 months was related to an exposure-dependent increase in the risk of asthma symptoms in children aged 13 to 14 yr ([4](#B4)). These results are comparable to our findings that the use of acetaminophen within the previous 12 months in children was associated with an increased risk of asthma. Overall, these observations suggest that the risk for asthma in childhood is likely to be influenced by acetaminophen exposure within the past 12 months, as well as in early life.

Several potential mechanisms exist to explain the risk of asthma. One main mechanism is downregulation of the glutathione pathway, which can be triggered by acetaminophen. The depletion of reduced antioxidants, such as glutathione, can lead to a decrease in pulmonary antioxidant defences against ROS-mediated oxidative stress ([26](#B26), [27](#B27)). Such oxidative stress can damage important components of the airway epithelium and lead to cell destruction ([6](#B6)). Metabolism of acetaminophen can also lead to pulmonary toxicity as a result of reduced glutathione levels in the body ([28](#B28)). Another potential mechanism leading to asthma susceptibility is stimulation of the innate immune response through airway exposure to allergens, viruses, and air pollutants ([29](#B29)). Acetaminophen is often used to control fever that can be caused by such inflammation. Moreover, these reactions increase expression of innate immune receptors, such as TLR2, TLR4, and the pro-inflammatory cytokines, IL-8 and IL-1β ([3](#B3)), and lead to oxidative stress linked to the pathophysiology of asthma, which manifests as excessive production of ROS by activated eosinophils, neutrophils, and macrophages ([9](#B9), [30](#B30)). These pathways suggest mechanisms by which acetaminophen may be related to asthma and airway inflammation risk.

TLR4 is a typical pattern recognition receptor ([31](#B31)), recognising pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) ([32](#B32)) and endogenous damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) released mainly as a result of tissue injury ([33](#B33), [34](#B34)). Moreover, direct damage of airways, through ROS-induced inflammation is mediated via TLR4 signalling pathways ([33](#B33)). Under conditions of airway hyperreactivity invoking inflammatory responses, epithelial cells damaged by oxidative stress can release DAMPs, which activate TLR4 signalling pathways in airway macrophages, initiating inflammatory responses, such as upregulation of Tumor Necrosis Factor-α (TNF-α) in concert with IL-1β ([34](#B34), [35](#B35)). Furthermore, *TLR4* polymorphisms may influence the balance between Th1 and Th2 responses, and hence susceptibility to allergic airway diseases ([17](#B17)). Therefore, in this study, we were interested in *TLR4* gene and selected 2 polymorphisms, rs4986790 and rs1927911, known to be associated with asthma. The majority of previous studies have analysed the relationship between asthma and the *TLR4* polymorphism, rs4986790. One study of Swedish children reported that rs4986790 was associated with a 4-fold higher prevalence of asthma ([36](#B36)); however, an Egyptian study reported no significant association of this marker with childhood asthma ([37](#B37)), and a further study the British showed no association of rs4986790 with asthma development ([38](#B38)). However, this polymorphism is not informative in some Asian populations. According to the HapMap database, the minor allele frequency of rs4986790 is zero among Japanese individuals. Similarly, in our study, the results of genotyping in 100 Korean children indicated lack of polymorphism at this locus (all children had the AA genotype; data not shown) and it was therefore not investigated further. The meta-analysis study reported an insignificant association between the *TLR4* polymorphism (rs4986790) and asthma. However, this report suggested that a relevant environmental exposures, other genetic variants, race/ethnicity, age, and gender involving this polymorphism should be considered when studying a complex, heterogeneous disease such as asthma ([39](#B39)). Literature regarding the asthma-related *TLR4* polymorphism, rs1927911, is not as abundant as that for rs4986790; however, rs1927911 had the greatest impact among several polymorphisms of *TLR4* on risk of childhood asthma associated with exposure to fine particulates (PM_2.5_) ([18](#B18)). In this study, we found a significant association between rs1927911 and asthma or BHR in Korean children. We propose that rs1927911 may enhance the risk of asthma in response to acetaminophen exposure during childhood, and such an effect might be explained by changes in the inflammatory response caused by the *TLR4* polymorphism.

Our study has some limitations. First, we investigated the relationship between acetaminophen use in the 12 months before the survey, not use of acetaminophen during infancy and diagnosis of asthma instead of recent symptoms of asthma aggravation ([40](#B40)). This has the possibility of reverse causation, as the use of acetaminophen is common after aggravation of asthma due to viral or bacterial infections in children. Also, we did not investigate the apparent causal connection whether this has an attack of asthma by actually acetaminophen use. It should be to carry out prospective and mechanism-related further studies. Second, this is a cross-sectional study, which prevented us from testing for a causal relationship. Third, our study did not demonstrate mechanisms connected with oxidative stress. We analysed the relationship between asthma and ROS-related-polymorphisms (rs1695 and rs1800566) of glutathione S-transferase pi 1 (*GSTP1*) and NAD(P)H dehydrogenase, quinone 1 (*NQO1*), respectively; however, these were not associated with the effects of recent acetaminophen use on asthma and BHR in Korean children aged 8-13 yr ([Supplementary Table 1](#S1), [2](#S2)). Finally, we analysed only one SNP in the *TLR4* gene and did not investigate its function.

Strengths of the study include the relatively large sample size and, the inclusion of BHR measurements from 2,428 children, providing more objective evidence for relationship between asthma and acetaminophen. In addition, while several studies have reported interactions between acetaminophen and ROS genes, this is the first to investigate whether the influence of acetaminophen and oxidative stress interacts with polymorphism at *TLR4*. Our results suggest that *TLR4* polymorphism can affect an increased the risk of asthma, and that this depends on whether the children were recently given acetaminophen. Additional studies will be required to confirm the interaction between *TLR4* and oxidative stress with regard to the development of asthma, to confirm these synergistic effects, and to clarify the underlying mechanisms.

In conclusion, *TLR4* polymorphism appears to modify the relationship between acetaminophen use and asthma or BHR in genetically susceptible children. The underlying mechanism for the relationship is likely to be mediated by oxidative stress or innate immune responses. Further studies are required to verify the interaction between *TLR4* and acetaminophen and to understand the relationship of this association to the pathogenesis of asthma.

## Footnotes

## Supplementary Materials

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Supplementary Materials

### Supplementary Materials

## References

1. Holgate ST. Genetic and environmental interaction in allergy and asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1999;104:1139–1146. doi: 10.1016/S0091-6749(99)70005-9.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0091-6749(99)70005-9) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7172426/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10588993/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Allergy%20Clin%20Immunol&title=Genetic%20and%20environmental%20interaction%20in%20allergy%20and%20asthma&author=ST%20Holgate&volume=104&publication_year=1999&pages=1139-1146&pmid=10588993&doi=10.1016/S0091-6749(99)70005-9&)

2. Simpson JL, Grissell TV, Douwes J, Scott RJ, Boyle MJ, Gibson PG. Innate immune activation in neutrophilic asthma and bronchiectasis. Thorax. 2007;62:211–218. doi: 10.1136/thx.2006.061358.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/thx.2006.061358) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2117164/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16844729/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Thorax&title=Innate%20immune%20activation%20in%20neutrophilic%20asthma%20and%20bronchiectasis&author=JL%20Simpson&author=TV%20Grissell&author=J%20Douwes&author=RJ%20Scott&author=MJ%20Boyle&volume=62&publication_year=2007&pages=211-218&pmid=16844729&doi=10.1136/thx.2006.061358&)

3. Papi A, Johnston SL. Rhinovirus infection induces expression of its own receptor intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) via increased NF-kappaB-mediated transcription. J Biol Chem. 1999;274:9707–9720. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.14.9707.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.14.9707) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10092659/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Biol%20Chem&title=Rhinovirus%20infection%20induces%20expression%20of%20its%20own%20receptor%20intercellular%20adhesion%20molecule%201%20(ICAM-1)%20via%20increased%20NF-kappaB-mediated%20transcription&author=A%20Papi&author=SL%20Johnston&volume=274&publication_year=1999&pages=9707-9720&pmid=10092659&doi=10.1074/jbc.274.14.9707&)

4. Beasley RW, Clayton TO, Crane J, Lai CK, Montefort SR, Mutius Ev, Stewart AW ISAAC Phase Three Study Group. Acetaminophen use and risk of asthma, rhinoconjunctivitis, and eczema in adolescents: International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood Phase Three. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011;183:171–178. doi: 10.1164/rccm.201005-0757OC.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.201005-0757OC) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20709817/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Respir%20Crit%20Care%20Med&title=Acetaminophen%20use%20and%20risk%20of%20asthma,%20rhinoconjunctivitis,%20and%20eczema%20in%20adolescents:%20International%20Study%20of%20Asthma%20and%20Allergies%20in%20Childhood%20Phase%20Three&author=RW%20Beasley&author=TO%20Clayton&author=J%20Crane&author=CK%20Lai&author=SR%20Montefort&volume=183&publication_year=2011&pages=171-178&pmid=20709817&doi=10.1164/rccm.201005-0757OC&)

5. Farquhar H, Stewart A, Mitchell E, Crane J, Eyers S, Weatherall M, Beasley R. The role of paracetamol in the pathogenesis of asthma. Clin Exp Allergy. 2010;40:32–41. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2009.03378.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2222.2009.03378.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20205695/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Exp%20Allergy&title=The%20role%20of%20paracetamol%20in%20the%20pathogenesis%20of%20asthma&author=H%20Farquhar&author=A%20Stewart&author=E%20Mitchell&author=J%20Crane&author=S%20Eyers&volume=40&publication_year=2010&pages=32-41&pmid=20205695&doi=10.1111/j.1365-2222.2009.03378.x&)

6. Eneli I, Sadri K, Camargo C, Jr, Barr RG. Acetaminophen and the risk of asthma: the epidemiologic and pathophysiologic evidence. Chest. 2005;127:604–612. doi: 10.1378/chest.127.2.604.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1378/chest.127.2.604) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15706003/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Chest&title=Acetaminophen%20and%20the%20risk%20of%20asthma:%20the%20epidemiologic%20and%20pathophysiologic%20evidence&author=I%20Eneli&author=K%20Sadri&author=C%20Camargo&author=RG%20Barr&volume=127&publication_year=2005&pages=604-612&pmid=15706003&doi=10.1378/chest.127.2.604&)

7. Garcia-Marcos L, Sanchez-Solis M, Perez-Fernandez V. Early exposure to acetaminophen and allergic disorders. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011;11:162–173. doi: 10.1097/ACI.0b013e3283464c28.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/ACI.0b013e3283464c28) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21505328/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Opin%20Allergy%20Clin%20Immunol&title=Early%20exposure%20to%20acetaminophen%20and%20allergic%20disorders&author=L%20Garcia-Marcos&author=M%20Sanchez-Solis&author=V%20Perez-Fernandez&volume=11&publication_year=2011&pages=162-173&pmid=21505328&doi=10.1097/ACI.0b013e3283464c28&)

8. Barnes PJ. Reactive oxygen species and airway inflammation. Free Radic Biol Med. 1990;9:235–243. doi: 10.1016/0891-5849(90)90034-g.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0891-5849(90)90034-g) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2272532/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Free%20Radic%20Biol%20Med&title=Reactive%20oxygen%20species%20and%20airway%20inflammation&author=PJ%20Barnes&volume=9&publication_year=1990&pages=235-243&pmid=2272532&doi=10.1016/0891-5849(90)90034-g&)

9. Wood LG, Gibson PG, Garg ML. Biomarkers of lipid peroxidation, airway inflammation and asthma. Eur Respir J. 2003;21:177–186. doi: 10.1183/09031936.03.00017003a.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1183/09031936.03.00017003a) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12570126/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20Respir%20J&title=Biomarkers%20of%20lipid%20peroxidation,%20airway%20inflammation%20and%20asthma&author=LG%20Wood&author=PG%20Gibson&author=ML%20Garg&volume=21&publication_year=2003&pages=177-186&pmid=12570126&doi=10.1183/09031936.03.00017003a&)

10. Katsumata U, Miura M, Ichinose M, Kimura K, Takahashi T, Inoue H, Takishima T. Oxygen radicals produce airway constriction and hyperresponsiveness in anesthetized cats. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1990;141:1158–1161. doi: 10.1164/ajrccm/141.5_Pt_1.1158.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1164/ajrccm/141.5_Pt_1.1158) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2131784/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20Rev%20Respir%20Dis&title=Oxygen%20radicals%20produce%20airway%20constriction%20and%20hyperresponsiveness%20in%20anesthetized%20cats&author=U%20Katsumata&author=M%20Miura&author=M%20Ichinose&author=K%20Kimura&author=T%20Takahashi&volume=141&publication_year=1990&pages=1158-1161&pmid=2131784&doi=10.1164/ajrccm/141.5_Pt_1.1158&)

11. Jarjour NN, Calhoun WJ. Enhanced production of oxygen radicals in asthma. J Lab Clin Med. 1994;123:131–136.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8288953/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Lab%20Clin%20Med&title=Enhanced%20production%20of%20oxygen%20radicals%20in%20asthma&author=NN%20Jarjour&author=WJ%20Calhoun&volume=123&publication_year=1994&pages=131-136&pmid=8288953&)

12. Sporn PH, Peters-Golden M, Simon RH. Hydrogen-peroxide-induced arachidonic acid metabolism in the rat alveolar macrophage. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1988;137:49–56. doi: 10.1164/ajrccm/137.1.49.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1164/ajrccm/137.1.49) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3122612/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20Rev%20Respir%20Dis&title=Hydrogen-peroxide-induced%20arachidonic%20acid%20metabolism%20in%20the%20rat%20alveolar%20macrophage&author=PH%20Sporn&author=M%20Peters-Golden&author=RH%20Simon&volume=137&publication_year=1988&pages=49-56&pmid=3122612&doi=10.1164/ajrccm/137.1.49&)

13. Harlan JM, Callahan KS. Role of hydrogen peroxide in the neutrophil-mediated release of prostacyclin from cultured endothelial cells. J Clin Invest. 1984;74:442–448. doi: 10.1172/JCI111440.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI111440) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC370495/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/6378974/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Invest&title=Role%20of%20hydrogen%20peroxide%20in%20the%20neutrophil-mediated%20release%20of%20prostacyclin%20from%20cultured%20endothelial%20cells&author=JM%20Harlan&author=KS%20Callahan&volume=74&publication_year=1984&pages=442-448&pmid=6378974&doi=10.1172/JCI111440&)

14. Fryer AA, Bianco A, Hepple M, Jones PW, Strange RC, Spiteri MA. Polymorphism at the glutathione S-transferase GSTP1 locus: a new marker for bronchial hyperresponsiveness and asthma. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2000;161:1437–1442. doi: 10.1164/ajrccm.161.5.9903006.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1164/ajrccm.161.5.9903006) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10806136/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Respir%20Crit%20Care%20Med&title=Polymorphism%20at%20the%20glutathione%20S-transferase%20GSTP1%20locus:%20a%20new%20marker%20for%20bronchial%20hyperresponsiveness%20and%20asthma&author=AA%20Fryer&author=A%20Bianco&author=M%20Hepple&author=PW%20Jones&author=RC%20Strange&volume=161&publication_year=2000&pages=1437-1442&pmid=10806136&doi=10.1164/ajrccm.161.5.9903006&)

15. Wood LG, Gibson PG. Dietary factors lead to innate immune activation in asthma. Pharmacol Ther. 2009;123:37–53. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2009.03.015.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2009.03.015) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19375453/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacol%20Ther&title=Dietary%20factors%20lead%20to%20innate%20immune%20activation%20in%20asthma&author=LG%20Wood&author=PG%20Gibson&volume=123&publication_year=2009&pages=37-53&pmid=19375453&doi=10.1016/j.pharmthera.2009.03.015&)

16. Kang SH, Jung YH, Kim HY, Seo JH, Lee JY, Kwon JW, Kim BJ, Kim HB, Lee SY, Jang GC, et al. Effect of paracetamol use on the modification of the development of asthma by reactive oxygen species genes. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2013;110:364–369. doi: 10.1016/j.anai.2013.03.008.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anai.2013.03.008) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23622008/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann%20Allergy%20Asthma%20Immunol&title=Effect%20of%20paracetamol%20use%20on%20the%20modification%20of%20the%20development%20of%20asthma%20by%20reactive%20oxygen%20species%20genes&author=SH%20Kang&author=YH%20Jung&author=HY%20Kim&author=JH%20Seo&author=JY%20Lee&volume=110&publication_year=2013&pages=364-369&pmid=23622008&doi=10.1016/j.anai.2013.03.008&)

17. Werner M, Topp R, Wimmer K, Richter K, Bischof W, Wjst M, Heinrich J. TLR4 gene variants modify endotoxin effects on asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2003;112:323–330. doi: 10.1067/mai.2003.1648.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1067/mai.2003.1648) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12897738/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Allergy%20Clin%20Immunol&title=TLR4%20gene%20variants%20modify%20endotoxin%20effects%20on%20asthma&author=M%20Werner&author=R%20Topp&author=K%20Wimmer&author=K%20Richter&author=W%20Bischof&volume=112&publication_year=2003&pages=323-330&pmid=12897738&doi=10.1067/mai.2003.1648&)

18. Kerkhof M, Postma DS, Brunekreef B, Reijmerink NE, Wijga AH, de Jongste JC, Gehring U, Koppelman GH. Toll-like receptor 2 and 4 genes influence susceptibility to adverse effects of traffic-related air pollution on childhood asthma. Thorax. 2010;65:690–697. doi: 10.1136/thx.2009.119636.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/thx.2009.119636) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20685742/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Thorax&title=Toll-like%20receptor%202%20and%204%20genes%20influence%20susceptibility%20to%20adverse%20effects%20of%20traffic-related%20air%20pollution%20on%20childhood%20asthma&author=M%20Kerkhof&author=DS%20Postma&author=B%20Brunekreef&author=NE%20Reijmerink&author=AH%20Wijga&volume=65&publication_year=2010&pages=690-697&pmid=20685742&doi=10.1136/thx.2009.119636&)

19. Yang IA, Fong KM, Holgate ST, Holloway JW. The role of Toll-like receptors and related receptors of the innate immune system in asthma. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2006;6:23–28. doi: 10.1097/01.all.0000200503.77295.bb.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.all.0000200503.77295.bb) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16505608/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Opin%20Allergy%20Clin%20Immunol&title=The%20role%20of%20Toll-like%20receptors%20and%20related%20receptors%20of%20the%20innate%20immune%20system%20in%20asthma&author=IA%20Yang&author=KM%20Fong&author=ST%20Holgate&author=JW%20Holloway&volume=6&publication_year=2006&pages=23-28&pmid=16505608&doi=10.1097/01.all.0000200503.77295.bb&)

20. Smit LA, Siroux V, Bouzigon E, Oryszczyn MP, Lathrop M, Demenais F, Kauffmann F Epidemiological Study on the Genetics and Environment of Asthma; Bronchial Hyperresponsiveness, and Atopy (EGEA) Cooperative Group. CD14 and toll-like receptor gene polymorphisms, country living, and asthma in adults. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009;179:363–368. doi: 10.1164/rccm.200810-1533OC.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.200810-1533OC) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19096003/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Respir%20Crit%20Care%20Med&title=CD14%20and%20toll-like%20receptor%20gene%20polymorphisms,%20country%20living,%20and%20asthma%20in%20adults&author=LA%20Smit&author=V%20Siroux&author=E%20Bouzigon&author=MP%20Oryszczyn&author=M%20Lathrop&volume=179&publication_year=2009&pages=363-368&pmid=19096003&doi=10.1164/rccm.200810-1533OC&)

21. Lee SY, Kwon JW, Seo JH, Song YH, Kim BJ, Yu J, Park KS, Kim H, Kim EJ, Lee JS, et al. Prevalence of atopy and allergic diseases in Korean children: associations with a farming environment and rural lifestyle. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2012;158:168–174. doi: 10.1159/000330820.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1159/000330820) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22286539/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int%20Arch%20Allergy%20Immunol&title=Prevalence%20of%20atopy%20and%20allergic%20diseases%20in%20Korean%20children:%20associations%20with%20a%20farming%20environment%20and%20rural%20lifestyle&author=SY%20Lee&author=JW%20Kwon&author=JH%20Seo&author=YH%20Song&author=BJ%20Kim&volume=158&publication_year=2012&pages=168-174&pmid=22286539&doi=10.1159/000330820&)

22. Perzanowski MS, Miller RL, Tang D, Ali D, Garfinkel RS, Chew GL, Goldstein IF, Perera FP, Barr RG. Prenatal acetaminophen exposure and risk of wheeze at age 5 years in an urban low-income cohort. Thorax. 2010;65:118–123. doi: 10.1136/thx.2009.121459.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/thx.2009.121459) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2876309/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19850963/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Thorax&title=Prenatal%20acetaminophen%20exposure%20and%20risk%20of%20wheeze%20at%20age%205%20years%20in%20an%20urban%20low-income%20cohort&author=MS%20Perzanowski&author=RL%20Miller&author=D%20Tang&author=D%20Ali&author=RS%20Garfinkel&volume=65&publication_year=2010&pages=118-123&pmid=19850963&doi=10.1136/thx.2009.121459&)

23. Shaheen SO, Newson RB, Sherriff A, Henderson AJ, Heron JE, Burney PG, Golding J ALSPAC Study Team. Paracetamol use in pregnancy and wheezing in early childhood. Thorax. 2002;57:958–963. doi: 10.1136/thorax.57.11.958.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/thorax.57.11.958) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1746229/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12403878/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Thorax&title=Paracetamol%20use%20in%20pregnancy%20and%20wheezing%20in%20early%20childhood&author=SO%20Shaheen&author=RB%20Newson&author=A%20Sherriff&author=AJ%20Henderson&author=JE%20Heron&volume=57&publication_year=2002&pages=958-963&pmid=12403878&doi=10.1136/thorax.57.11.958&)

24. Beasley R, Clayton T, Crane J, von Mutius E, Lai CK, Montefort S, Stewart A ISAAC Phase Three Study Group. Association between paracetamol use in infancy and childhood, and risk of asthma, rhinoconjunctivitis, and eczema in children aged 6-7 years: analysis from Phase Three of the ISAAC programme. Lancet. 2008;372:1039–1048. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61445-2.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61445-2) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18805332/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Lancet&title=Association%20between%20paracetamol%20use%20in%20infancy%20and%20childhood,%20and%20risk%20of%20asthma,%20rhinoconjunctivitis,%20and%20eczema%20in%20children%20aged%206-7%20years:%20analysis%20from%20Phase%20Three%20of%20the%20ISAAC%20programme&author=R%20Beasley&author=T%20Clayton&author=J%20Crane&author=E%20von%20Mutius&author=CK%20Lai&volume=372&publication_year=2008&pages=1039-1048&pmid=18805332&doi=10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61445-2&)

25. Shaheen SO, Sterne JA, Songhurst CE, Burney PG. Frequent paracetamol use and asthma in adults. Thorax. 2000;55:266–270. doi: 10.1136/thorax.55.4.266.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/thorax.55.4.266) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1745727/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10722764/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Thorax&title=Frequent%20paracetamol%20use%20and%20asthma%20in%20adults&author=SO%20Shaheen&author=JA%20Sterne&author=CE%20Songhurst&author=PG%20Burney&volume=55&publication_year=2000&pages=266-270&pmid=10722764&doi=10.1136/thorax.55.4.266&)

26. Rahman I, MacNee W. Oxidative stress and regulation of glutathione in lung inflammation. Eur Respir J. 2000;16:534–554. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-3003.2000.016003534.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1399-3003.2000.016003534.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11028671/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20Respir%20J&title=Oxidative%20stress%20and%20regulation%20of%20glutathione%20in%20lung%20inflammation&author=I%20Rahman&author=W%20MacNee&volume=16&publication_year=2000&pages=534-554&pmid=11028671&doi=10.1034/j.1399-3003.2000.016003534.x&)

27. Smith LJ, Anderson J, Shamsuddin M, Hsueh W. Effect of fasting on hyperoxic lung injury in mice: the role of glutathione. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1990;141:141–149. doi: 10.1164/ajrccm/141.1.141.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1164/ajrccm/141.1.141) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2297173/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20Rev%20Respir%20Dis&title=Effect%20of%20fasting%20on%20hyperoxic%20lung%20injury%20in%20mice:%20the%20role%20of%20glutathione&author=LJ%20Smith&author=J%20Anderson&author=M%20Shamsuddin&author=W%20Hsueh&volume=141&publication_year=1990&pages=141-149&pmid=2297173&doi=10.1164/ajrccm/141.1.141&)

28. Jenkins RE, Kitteringham NR, Goldring CE, Dowdall SM, Hamlett J, Lane CS, Boerma JS, Vermeulen NP, Park BK. Glutathione-S-transferase pi as a model protein for the characterisation of chemically reactive metabolites. Proteomics. 2008;8:301–315. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200700843.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.200700843) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18203258/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proteomics&title=Glutathione-S-transferase%20pi%20as%20a%20model%20protein%20for%20the%20characterisation%20of%20chemically%20reactive%20metabolites&author=RE%20Jenkins&author=NR%20Kitteringham&author=CE%20Goldring&author=SM%20Dowdall&author=J%20Hamlett&volume=8&publication_year=2008&pages=301-315&pmid=18203258&doi=10.1002/pmic.200700843&)

29. Douwes J, Gibson P, Pekkanen J, Pearce N. Non-eosinophilic asthma: importance and possible mechanisms. Thorax. 2002;57:643–648. doi: 10.1136/thorax.57.7.643.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/thorax.57.7.643) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1746367/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12096210/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Thorax&title=Non-eosinophilic%20asthma:%20importance%20and%20possible%20mechanisms&author=J%20Douwes&author=P%20Gibson&author=J%20Pekkanen&author=N%20Pearce&volume=57&publication_year=2002&pages=643-648&pmid=12096210&doi=10.1136/thorax.57.7.643&)

30. Wu W, Chen Y, Hazen SL. Eosinophil peroxidase nitrates protein tyrosyl residues: implications for oxidative damage by nitrating intermediates in eosinophilic inflammatory disorders. J Biol Chem. 1999;274:25933–25944. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.36.25933.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.36.25933) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10464338/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Biol%20Chem&title=Eosinophil%20peroxidase%20nitrates%20protein%20tyrosyl%20residues:%20implications%20for%20oxidative%20damage%20by%20nitrating%20intermediates%20in%20eosinophilic%20inflammatory%20disorders&author=W%20Wu&author=Y%20Chen&author=SL%20Hazen&volume=274&publication_year=1999&pages=25933-25944&pmid=10464338&doi=10.1074/jbc.274.36.25933&)

31. Akira S, Takeda K, Kaisho T. Toll-like receptors: critical proteins linking innate and acquired immunity. Nat Immunol. 2001;2:675–680. doi: 10.1038/90609.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/90609) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11477402/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Immunol&title=Toll-like%20receptors:%20critical%20proteins%20linking%20innate%20and%20acquired%20immunity&author=S%20Akira&author=K%20Takeda&author=T%20Kaisho&volume=2&publication_year=2001&pages=675-680&pmid=11477402&doi=10.1038/90609&)

32. Miyata R, van Eeden SF. The innate and adaptive immune response induced by alveolar macrophages exposed to ambient particulate matter. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2011;257:209–226. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2011.09.007.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.taap.2011.09.007) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21951342/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Toxicol%20Appl%20Pharmacol&title=The%20innate%20and%20adaptive%20immune%20response%20induced%20by%20alveolar%20macrophages%20exposed%20to%20ambient%20particulate%20matter&author=R%20Miyata&author=SF%20van%20Eeden&volume=257&publication_year=2011&pages=209-226&pmid=21951342&doi=10.1016/j.taap.2011.09.007&)

33. Erridge C. Endogenous ligands of TLR2 and TLR4: agonists or assistants? J Leukoc Biol. 2010;87:989–999. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1209775.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1189/jlb.1209775) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20179153/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Leukoc%20Biol&title=Endogenous%20ligands%20of%20TLR2%20and%20TLR4:%20agonists%20or%20assistants?&author=C%20Erridge&volume=87&publication_year=2010&pages=989-999&pmid=20179153&doi=10.1189/jlb.1209775&)

34. Miller YI, Choi SH, Wiesner P, Fang L, Harkewicz R, Hartvigsen K, Boullier A, Gonen A, Diehl CJ, Que X, et al. Oxidation-specific epitopes are danger-associated molecular patterns recognized by pattern recognition receptors of innate immunity. Circ Res. 2011;108:235–248. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.223875.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.223875) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3075542/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21252151/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circ%20Res&title=Oxidation-specific%20epitopes%20are%20danger-associated%20molecular%20patterns%20recognized%20by%20pattern%20recognition%20receptors%20of%20innate%20immunity&author=YI%20Miller&author=SH%20Choi&author=P%20Wiesner&author=L%20Fang&author=R%20Harkewicz&volume=108&publication_year=2011&pages=235-248&pmid=21252151&doi=10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.223875&)

35. Auerbach A, Hernandez ML. The effect of environmental oxidative stress on airway inflammation. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2012;12:133–139. doi: 10.1097/ACI.0b013e32835113d6.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/ACI.0b013e32835113d6) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3319111/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22306553/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Opin%20Allergy%20Clin%20Immunol&title=The%20effect%20of%20environmental%20oxidative%20stress%20on%20airway%20inflammation&author=A%20Auerbach&author=ML%20Hernandez&volume=12&publication_year=2012&pages=133-139&pmid=22306553&doi=10.1097/ACI.0b013e32835113d6&)

36. Fagerås Böttcher M, Hmani-Aifa M, Lindström A, Jenmalm MC, Mai XM, Nilsson L, Zdolsek HA, Björkstén B, Söderkvist P, Vaarala O. A TLR4 polymorphism is associated with asthma and reduced lipopolysaccharide-induced interleukin-12(p70) responses in Swedish children. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2004;114:561–567. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2004.04.050.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2004.04.050) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15356557/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Allergy%20Clin%20Immunol&title=A%20TLR4%20polymorphism%20is%20associated%20with%20asthma%20and%20reduced%20lipopolysaccharide-induced%20interleukin-12(p70)%20responses%20in%20Swedish%20children&author=M%20Fager%C3%A5s%20B%C3%B6ttcher&author=M%20Hmani-Aifa&author=A%20Lindstr%C3%B6m&author=MC%20Jenmalm&author=XM%20Mai&volume=114&publication_year=2004&pages=561-567&pmid=15356557&doi=10.1016/j.jaci.2004.04.050&)

37. Hussein YM, Awad HA, Shalaby SM, Ali AS, Alzahrani SS. Toll-like receptor 2 and Toll-like receptor 4 polymorphisms and susceptibility to asthma and allergic rhinitis: a case-control analysis. Cell Immunol. 2012;274:34–38. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2012.02.006.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cellimm.2012.02.006) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22402138/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Immunol&title=Toll-like%20receptor%202%20and%20Toll-like%20receptor%204%20polymorphisms%20and%20susceptibility%20to%20asthma%20and%20allergic%20rhinitis:%20a%20case-control%20analysis&author=YM%20Hussein&author=HA%20Awad&author=SM%20Shalaby&author=AS%20Ali&author=SS%20Alzahrani&volume=274&publication_year=2012&pages=34-38&pmid=22402138&doi=10.1016/j.cellimm.2012.02.006&)

38. Yang IA, Barton SJ, Rorke S, Cakebread JA, Keith TP, Clough JB, Holgate ST, Holloway JW. Toll-like receptor 4 polymorphism and severity of atopy in asthmatics. Genes Immun. 2004;5:41–45. doi: 10.1038/sj.gene.6364037.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.gene.6364037) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14735148/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genes%20Immun&title=Toll-like%20receptor%204%20polymorphism%20and%20severity%20of%20atopy%20in%20asthmatics&author=IA%20Yang&author=SJ%20Barton&author=S%20Rorke&author=JA%20Cakebread&author=TP%20Keith&volume=5&publication_year=2004&pages=41-45&pmid=14735148&doi=10.1038/sj.gene.6364037&)

39. Chen S. Association between the TLR4 +896A>G (Asp299Gly) polymorphism and asthma: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Asthma. 2012;49:999–1003. doi: 10.3109/02770903.2012.738270.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3109/02770903.2012.738270) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23574398/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Asthma&title=Association%20between%20the%20TLR4%20+896A>G%20(Asp299Gly)%20polymorphism%20and%20asthma:%20a%20systematic%20review%20and%20meta-analysis&author=S%20Chen&volume=49&publication_year=2012&pages=999-1003&pmid=23574398&doi=10.3109/02770903.2012.738270&)

40. Kim MH, Kwon JW, Kim HB, Song Y, Yu J, Kim WK, Kim BJ, Lee SY, Kim KW, Ji HM, et al. Parent-reported ISAAC written questionnaire may underestimate the prevalence of asthma in children aged 10-12 years. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2012;47:36–43. doi: 10.1002/ppul.21512.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ppul.21512) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21830311/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pediatr%20Pulmonol&title=Parent-reported%20ISAAC%20written%20questionnaire%20may%20underestimate%20the%20prevalence%20of%20asthma%20in%20children%20aged%2010-12%20years&author=MH%20Kim&author=JW%20Kwon&author=HB%20Kim&author=Y%20Song&author=J%20Yu&volume=47&publication_year=2012&pages=36-43&pmid=21830311&doi=10.1002/ppul.21512&)
