# A Variant Associated with Nicotine Dependence, Lung Cancer and Peripheral Arterial Disease

## Metadata
**Authors:** Thorgeir E Thorgeirsson, Frank Geller, Patrick Sulem, Thorunn Rafnar, Anna Wiste, Kristinn P Magnusson, Andrei Manolescu, Gudmar Thorleifsson, Hreinn Stefansson, Andres Ingason, Simon N Stacey, Jon T Bergthorsson, Steinunn Thorlacius, Julius Gudmundsson, Thorlakur Jonsson, Margret Jakobsdottir, Jona Saemundsdottir, Olof Olafsdottir, Larus J Gudmundsson, Gyda Bjornsdottir, Kristleifur Kristjansson, Halla Skuladottir, Helgi J Isaksson, Tomas Gudbjartsson, Gregory T Jones, Thomas Mueller, Anders Gottsäter, Andrea Flex, Katja KH Aben, Femmie de Vegt, Peter FA Mulders, Dolores Isla, Maria J Vidal, Laura Asin, Berta Saez, Laura Murillo, Thorsteinn Blondal, Halldor Kolbeinsson, Jon G Stefansson, Ingunn Hansdottir, Valgerdur Runarsdottir, Roberto Pola, Bengt Lindblad, Andre M van Rij, Benjamin Dieplinger, Meinhard Haltmayer, Jose I Mayordomo, Lambertus A Kiemeney, Stefan E Matthiasson, Hogni Oskarsson, Thorarinn Tyrfingsson, Daniel F Gudbjartsson, Jeffrey R Gulcher, Steinn Jonsson, Unnur Thorsteinsdottir, Augustine Kong, Kari Stefansson
**Journal:** Nature
**Date:** 2008 Apr 3
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature06846](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06846)
**PMID:** 18385739
**PMCID:** PMC4539558
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4539558/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4539558/pdf/nihms-389111.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4539558/pdf/nihms-389111.pdf)

## Abstract

Smoking is a leading cause of preventable death, causing approximately five million premature deaths world-wide each year1, 2. Evidence for genetic influence on smoking behaviour and nicotine dependence (ND)3-8 has prompted a search for susceptibility genes. Furthermore, assessing the impact of sequence variants on smoking-related diseases is important for public health reasons9, 10. Smoking is the major risk factor for lung cancer (LC)11-14, and one of the main risk factors for peripheral arterial disease (PAD)15-17. We have identified a common variant in the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor gene cluster on chromosome 15q24 with an effect on smoking quantity, ND and the risk of two smoking-related diseases in populations of European descent. The variant has an effect on the number of cigarettes smoked per day in 15,771 smokers (P=6×10−20). The same variant associated with ND in a previous genome-wide association study using low quantity smokers as controls (OR=1.3, P=1×10−3)18, 19, and with a similar approach we observe a highly significant association with ND (OR =1.40, P=7×10−15). Comparison of LC (N=1,024) and PAD (N= 2,738) cases with about 30,000 population controls each showed that the variant confers risk of LC (OR=1.31, P=1.5×10−8) and PAD (OR=1.19, P=1.4×10−7). The findings highlight the role of nicotine addiction in the pathogenesis of other serious diseases and provide a case study of the role of active gene-environment correlation20 in the pathogenesis of disease.

## METHODS

### Icelandic Subjects

For all studies involving Icelandic subjects, the study protocols were approved by the National Bioethics Committee (NBC) and the Data Protection Authority (DPA ) of Iceland. The DPA encrypted all personal identifiers associated with information or blood samples using the third-party encryption system^31^. Overall the Icelandic study involves 10,995 subjects with information on SQ available in the GWA, an additional 2,950 subjects with information on SQ, and 4,203 never-smokers. In the studies of LC and PAD, 665 and 1,503 patients, respectively, and 28,752 population controls were used (for details see [Table 1](#T1)).

### Smoking

All Icelandic subjects in the study of smoking-related phenotypes, including Icelandic population controls, were originally recruited for different genetic studies conducted over eleven years (1996-2007) at deCODE genetics and information on the number of cigarettes smoked per day (cpd) was available from questionnaires. The cpd information was categorised into SQ level and used as a quantitative variable. Detailed information on SQ was also available for the foreign LC populations ([Supplementary Information](#SD1)), but not for the foreign PAD populations.

### Nicotine Dependence

For a subset of the Icelandic smokers, information on the criteria used to diagnose ND was available from ongoing studies of ND and Anxiety/Depression^32^. We excluded individuals with diagnoses of other substance dependence or abuse giving a total of 2,394 ND subjects. A score of 4 or higher on the FTND^22^, or endorsement of three or more DSM criteria were used to assign affected status for ND. Additional information on the Icelandic smoking and ND study group is available in the [Supplementary Information](#SD1).

### Lung Cancer

#### Iceland

Recruitment was initiated in the year 1998 using a nationwide list from the Icelandic Cancer Registry (ICR). Approximately 1,265 LC patients were alive during the period of recruitment and 665 participated in the project. Information in the ICR includes year and age at diagnosis, year of death, SNOMED code and ICD-10 classification. Histological and cytological verification was available for 647 cases; the remaining 18 cases were diagnosed clinically.

#### The Netherlands

The 90 patients and 2,018 controls were identified retrospectively through three different ongoing studies on genetic risk factors of disease. All three study protocols were approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre.

#### Spain

Patients were recruited from the Oncology Department of Zaragoza Hospital, from June 2006 to June 2007, and of 330 patients that were invited to participate, 292 enrolled (88%). Clinical information including age at onset and histology were collected from medical records. The 1,474 control individuals were approached at the Zaragoza University Hospital (ZUH). Study protocols were approved by the Institutional Review Board of ZUH.

### Peripheral Arterial Disease

#### Iceland

Patients have been recruited over the past nine years, as part of a genetic study at deCODE, from a registry of individuals diagnosed with PAD at the major hospital in Reykjavik, the Landspitali University Hospital, during the years 1983 to 2006. Diagnosis was confirmed by vascular imaging or segmental pressure measurements.

#### Austria

Patients and controls were recruited through the Linz Peripheral Arterial Disease (LIPAD) study during 2000 to 2002, at the St. John of God Hospital, Department of Surgery. Of the patients admitted for evaluation of suspected or definite PAD, all patients with chronic atherosclerotic occlusive disease of the lower extremities associated with typical symptoms—such as claudication or leg pain on exertion, rest pain, or minor or major tissue loss—were included on the basis of the final clinical diagnosis established by attending vascular surgeons. The diagnosis was verified by interview, physical examination, noninvasive techniques, and angiography^33^. All control subjects were patients at the same hospital and fulfilled the following criteria: no clinical indication of PAD by history and physical examination; systolic brachial blood pressure equal to or less than the blood pressure in each of the right and left anterior tibial and posterior tibial arteries (ie, ABI ≥1.0)^33^. Smoking status was assessed according to Rutherford et al., 1997^34^.

#### Sweden

Patients and controls were recruited at the Department of Vascular Diseases at Malmö University Hospital, a single referral centre for all patients with critical limb ischemia in the three southernmost health-care districts in Sweden (723,750 inhabitants in 2001). The diagnosis of critical limb ischemia was made in accordance with Trans-Atlantic Inter-Society Consensus scientific criteria^35^ of ulceration, gangrene, or rest pain caused by PAD proven by ankle pressure (<50 to 70 mm Hg), reduced toe pressure (<30 to 50 mm Hg), or reduced transcutaneous oxygen tension. Diagnosis was confirmed by an experienced vascular surgery consultant and toe pressure measurements in patients with arteries in the affected leg that were non-compressible and the ankle pressure was >50 to 70 mm Hg. The control group consisted of healthy individuals without symptomatic PAD included in a health screening programme for a preventive medicine project^36^.

#### Italy

Patients and controls were recruited among subjects admitted to the Department of Internal Medicine and Angiology of the A. Gemelli University Hospital of Rome, from 2000 to 2001. Inclusion criteria for the PAD group were Caucasian origin and presence of PAD, diagnosed in accordance with established criteria^37^. All patients had an ankle/arm pressure index lower than 0.8 and were at Fontaine's stage II, with intermittent claudication and no rest pain or trophic lesions. Inclusion criteria for the control group were Caucasian origin, absence of PAD and CAD and no relationship with cases. Additional exclusion criteria from the study were tumours, chronic inflammatory diseases, and autoimmune diseases^38^.

#### New Zealand

Patients were recruited from the Otago-Southland region, and PAD was confirmed by an ankle brachial index<0.7, pulse volume recordings and angiography/ultrasound imaging. The control group consisted of elderly individuals with no history of vascular disease from the same geographical region. Controls were asymptomatic for PAD and had ankle brachial indexes >1. An abdominal ultrasound scan excluded concurrent abdominal aortic aneurysm from both the PAD and control groups and Anglo-European ancestry was required for inclusion.

### Genotyping

All 10,995 samples in the GWA study of SQ were genotyped using genotyping systems and specialised software from Illumina (Human Hap300 and Human Hap300-duo+ Bead Arrays, Illumina)^39^. Rs1051730 was genotyped using a Centaurus assay (Nanogen) for 8,566 Icelandic samples and all samples in the foreign study groups. Information on the genotyping and quality control is in the [Supplementary Information](#SD1).

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgements

We thank the participants in the genetic studies whose contributions made this work possible, the staff at Noatun (deCODE's recruitment centre), and personnel at deCODE's core facilities. This work was supported in part by funds from the National Institute of Drug Abuse and the European Commission.

## Footnotes

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Supplementary Materials

### Supplementary Materials

## References

1. Annual smoking-attributable mortality, years of potential life lost, and productivity losses--United States, 1997-2001. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2005;54:625–8.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15988406/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=MMWR%20Morb%20Mortal%20Wkly%20Rep&title=Annual%20smoking-attributable%20mortality,%20years%20of%20potential%20life%20lost,%20and%20productivity%20losses--United%20States,%201997-2001.&volume=54&publication_year=2005&pages=625-8&pmid=15988406&)

2. World Health Organization Economics of Tobacco Control. 1999 Aug 20; Available at: www.who.int/gb/fctc/PDF/wg1/e1t2.pdf.  [www.who.int/gb/fctc/PDF/wg1/e1t2.pdf](http://www.who.int/gb/fctc/PDF/wg1/e1t2.pdf)

3. Carmelli D, Swan GE, Robinette D, Fabsitz R. Genetic influence on smoking--a study of male twins. N Engl J Med. 1992;327:829–33. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199209173271201.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM199209173271201) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1508241/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N%20Engl%20J%20Med&title=Genetic%20influence%20on%20smoking--a%20study%20of%20male%20twins.&author=D%20Carmelli&author=GE%20Swan&author=D%20Robinette&author=R%20Fabsitz&volume=327&publication_year=1992&pages=829-33&pmid=1508241&doi=10.1056/NEJM199209173271201&)

4. Li MD, Cheng R, Ma JZ, Swan GE. A meta-analysis of estimated genetic and environmental effects on smoking behavior in male and female adult twins. Addiction. 2003;98:23–31. doi: 10.1046/j.1360-0443.2003.00295.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1360-0443.2003.00295.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12492752/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Addiction&title=A%20meta-analysis%20of%20estimated%20genetic%20and%20environmental%20effects%20on%20smoking%20behavior%20in%20male%20and%20female%20adult%20twins.&author=MD%20Li&author=R%20Cheng&author=JZ%20Ma&author=GE%20Swan&volume=98&publication_year=2003&pages=23-31&pmid=12492752&doi=10.1046/j.1360-0443.2003.00295.x&)

5. Kendler KS, et al. A population-based twin study in women of smoking initiation and nicotine dependence. Psychol Med. 1999;29:299–308. doi: 10.1017/s0033291798008022.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1017/s0033291798008022) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10218922/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Psychol%20Med&title=A%20population-based%20twin%20study%20in%20women%20of%20smoking%20initiation%20and%20nicotine%20dependence.&author=KS%20Kendler&volume=29&publication_year=1999&pages=299-308&pmid=10218922&doi=10.1017/s0033291798008022&)

6. Heath AC, Martin NG. Genetic models for the natural history of smoking: evidence for a genetic influence on smoking persistence. Addict Behav. 1993;18:19–34. doi: 10.1016/0306-4603(93)90005-t.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0306-4603(93)90005-t) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8465673/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Addict%20Behav&title=Genetic%20models%20for%20the%20natural%20history%20of%20smoking:%20evidence%20for%20a%20genetic%20influence%20on%20smoking%20persistence.&author=AC%20Heath&author=NG%20Martin&volume=18&publication_year=1993&pages=19-34&pmid=8465673&doi=10.1016/0306-4603(93)90005-t&)

7. Madden PA, et al. The genetics of smoking persistence in men and women: a multicultural study. Behav Genet. 1999;29:423–31. doi: 10.1023/a:1021674804714.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1021674804714) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10857247/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Behav%20Genet&title=The%20genetics%20of%20smoking%20persistence%20in%20men%20and%20women:%20a%20multicultural%20study.&author=PA%20Madden&volume=29&publication_year=1999&pages=423-31&pmid=10857247&doi=10.1023/a:1021674804714&)

8. Vink JM, Willemsen G, Beem AL, Boomsma DI. The Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence in a Dutch sample of daily smokers and ex-smokers. Addict Behav. 2005;30:575–9. doi: 10.1016/j.addbeh.2004.05.023.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addbeh.2004.05.023) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15718074/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Addict%20Behav&title=The%20Fagerstrom%20Test%20for%20Nicotine%20Dependence%20in%20a%20Dutch%20sample%20of%20daily%20smokers%20and%20ex-smokers.&author=JM%20Vink&author=G%20Willemsen&author=AL%20Beem&author=DI%20Boomsma&volume=30&publication_year=2005&pages=575-9&pmid=15718074&doi=10.1016/j.addbeh.2004.05.023&)

9. Carlsten C, Burke W. Potential for genetics to promote public health: genetics research on smoking suggests caution about expectations. Jama. 2006;296:2480–2. doi: 10.1001/jama.296.20.2480.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.296.20.2480) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17119145/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Jama&title=Potential%20for%20genetics%20to%20promote%20public%20health:%20genetics%20research%20on%20smoking%20suggests%20caution%20about%20expectations.&author=C%20Carlsten&author=W%20Burke&volume=296&publication_year=2006&pages=2480-2&pmid=17119145&doi=10.1001/jama.296.20.2480&)

10. Bierut LJ, et al. Genetic research and smoking behavior. Jama. 2007;297:809. doi: 10.1001/jama.297.8.809. author reply 810.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.297.8.809) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17327520/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Jama&title=Genetic%20research%20and%20smoking%20behavior.&author=LJ%20Bierut&volume=297&publication_year=2007&pages=809&pmid=17327520&doi=10.1001/jama.297.8.809&)

11. Doll R, Hill AB. A study of the aetiology of carcinoma of the lung. Br Med J. 1952;2:1271–86. doi: 10.1136/bmj.2.4797.1271.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.2.4797.1271) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2022425/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12997741/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Br%20Med%20J&title=A%20study%20of%20the%20aetiology%20of%20carcinoma%20of%20the%20lung.&author=R%20Doll&author=AB%20Hill&volume=2&publication_year=1952&pages=1271-86&pmid=12997741&doi=10.1136/bmj.2.4797.1271&)

12. Doll R, Peto R. Cigarette smoking and bronchial carcinoma: dose and time relationships among regular smokers and lifelong non-smokers. J Epidemiol Community Health. 1978;32:303–13. doi: 10.1136/jech.32.4.303.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/jech.32.4.303) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1060963/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/744822/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Epidemiol%20Community%20Health&title=Cigarette%20smoking%20and%20bronchial%20carcinoma:%20dose%20and%20time%20relationships%20among%20regular%20smokers%20and%20lifelong%20non-smokers.&author=R%20Doll&author=R%20Peto&volume=32&publication_year=1978&pages=303-13&pmid=744822&doi=10.1136/jech.32.4.303&)

13. Wynder EL, Graham EA. Tobacco smoking as a possible etiologic factor in bronchiogenic carcinoma; a study of 684 proved cases. J Am Med Assoc. 1950;143:329–36. doi: 10.1001/jama.1950.02910390001001.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.1950.02910390001001) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15415260/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Am%20Med%20Assoc&title=Tobacco%20smoking%20as%20a%20possible%20etiologic%20factor%20in%20bronchiogenic%20carcinoma;%20a%20study%20of%20684%20proved%20cases.&author=EL%20Wynder&author=EA%20Graham&volume=143&publication_year=1950&pages=329-36&pmid=15415260&doi=10.1001/jama.1950.02910390001001&)

14. Parkin DM, Bray F, Ferlay J, Pisani P. Global cancer statistics, 2002. CA Cancer J Clin. 2005;55:74–108. doi: 10.3322/canjclin.55.2.74.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3322/canjclin.55.2.74) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15761078/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=CA%20Cancer%20J%20Clin&title=Global%20cancer%20statistics,%202002.&author=DM%20Parkin&author=F%20Bray&author=J%20Ferlay&author=P%20Pisani&volume=55&publication_year=2005&pages=74-108&pmid=15761078&doi=10.3322/canjclin.55.2.74&)

15. Hirsch AT, et al. ACC/AHA 2005 Practice Guidelines for the management of patients with peripheral arterial disease (lower extremity, renal, mesenteric, and abdominal aortic): a collaborative report from the American Association for Vascular Surgery/Society for Vascular Surgery, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society for Vascular Medicine and Biology, Society of Interventional Radiology, and the ACC/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Develop Guidelines for the Management of Patients With Peripheral Arterial Disease): endorsed by the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; Society for Vascular Nursing; TransAtlantic Inter-Society Consensus; and Vascular Disease Foundation. Circulation. 2006;113:e463–654. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.174526.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.174526) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16549646/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=ACC/AHA%202005%20Practice%20Guidelines%20for%20the%20management%20of%20patients%20with%20peripheral%20arterial%20disease%20(lower%20extremity,%20renal,%20mesenteric,%20and%20abdominal%20aortic):%20a%20collaborative%20report%20from%20the%20American%20Association%20for%20Vascular%20Surgery/Society%20for%20Vascular%20Surgery,%20Society%20for%20Cardiovascular%20Angiography%20and%20Interventions,%20Society%20for%20Vascular%20Medicine%20and%20Biology,%20Society%20of%20Interventional%20Radiology,%20and%20the%20ACC/AHA%20Task%20Force%20on%20Practice%20Guidelines%20(Writing%20Committee%20to%20Develop%20Guidelines%20for%20the%20Management%20of%20Patients%20With%20Peripheral%20Arterial%20Disease):%20endorsed%20by%20the%20American%20Association%20of%20Cardiovascular%20and%20Pulmonary%20Rehabilitation;%20National%20Heart,%20Lung,%20and%20Blood%20Institute;%20Society%20for%20Vascular%20Nursing;%20TransAtlantic%20Inter-Society%20Consensus;%20and%20Vascular%20Disease%20Foundation.&author=AT%20Hirsch&volume=113&publication_year=2006&pages=e463-654&pmid=16549646&doi=10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.174526&)

16. Powell JT, et al. Risk factors associated with the development of peripheral arterial disease in smokers: a case-control study. Atherosclerosis. 1997;129:41–8. doi: 10.1016/s0021-9150(96)06012-1.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0021-9150(96)06012-1) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9069515/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Atherosclerosis&title=Risk%20factors%20associated%20with%20the%20development%20of%20peripheral%20arterial%20disease%20in%20smokers:%20a%20case-control%20study.&author=JT%20Powell&volume=129&publication_year=1997&pages=41-8&pmid=9069515&doi=10.1016/s0021-9150(96)06012-1&)

17. Price JF, et al. Relationship between smoking and cardiovascular risk factors in the development of peripheral arterial disease and coronary artery disease: Edinburgh Artery Study. Eur Heart J. 1999;20:344–53. doi: 10.1053/euhj.1998.1194.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1053/euhj.1998.1194) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10206381/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20Heart%20J&title=Relationship%20between%20smoking%20and%20cardiovascular%20risk%20factors%20in%20the%20development%20of%20peripheral%20arterial%20disease%20and%20coronary%20artery%20disease:%20Edinburgh%20Artery%20Study.&author=JF%20Price&volume=20&publication_year=1999&pages=344-53&pmid=10206381&doi=10.1053/euhj.1998.1194&)

18. Saccone SF, et al. Cholinergic nicotinic receptor genes implicated in a nicotine dependence association study targeting 348 candidate genes with 3713 SNPs. Hum Mol Genet. 2007;16:36–49. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddl438.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddl438) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2270437/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17135278/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hum%20Mol%20Genet&title=Cholinergic%20nicotinic%20receptor%20genes%20implicated%20in%20a%20nicotine%20dependence%20association%20study%20targeting%20348%20candidate%20genes%20with%203713%20SNPs.&author=SF%20Saccone&volume=16&publication_year=2007&pages=36-49&pmid=17135278&doi=10.1093/hmg/ddl438&)

19. Bierut LJ, et al. Novel genes identified in a high-density genome wide association study for nicotine dependence. Hum Mol Genet. 2007;16:24–35. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddl441.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddl441) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2278047/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17158188/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hum%20Mol%20Genet&title=Novel%20genes%20identified%20in%20a%20high-density%20genome%20wide%20association%20study%20for%20nicotine%20dependence.&author=LJ%20Bierut&volume=16&publication_year=2007&pages=24-35&pmid=17158188&doi=10.1093/hmg/ddl441&)

20. Plomin R, DeFries JC, Loehlin JC. Genotype-environment interaction and correlation in the analysis of human behavior. Psychol Bull. 1977;84:309–22.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/557211/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Psychol%20Bull&title=Genotype-environment%20interaction%20and%20correlation%20in%20the%20analysis%20of%20human%20behavior.&author=R%20Plomin&author=JC%20DeFries&author=JC%20Loehlin&volume=84&publication_year=1977&pages=309-22&pmid=557211&)

21. Berrettini W, et al. alpha-5/alpha-3 nicotinic receptor subunit alleles increase risk for heavy smoking. Mol Psychiatry. 2008 doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4002154.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.mp.4002154) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2507863/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18227835/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Psychiatry&title=alpha-5/alpha-3%20nicotinic%20receptor%20subunit%20alleles%20increase%20risk%20for%20heavy%20smoking.&author=W%20Berrettini&publication_year=2008&pmid=18227835&doi=10.1038/sj.mp.4002154&)

22. Heatherton TF, Kozlowski LT, Frecker RC, Fagerstrom KO. The Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence: a revision of the Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire. Br J Addict. 1991;86:1119–27. doi: 10.1111/j.1360-0443.1991.tb01879.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1360-0443.1991.tb01879.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1932883/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Br%20J%20Addict&title=The%20Fagerstrom%20Test%20for%20Nicotine%20Dependence:%20a%20revision%20of%20the%20Fagerstrom%20Tolerance%20Questionnaire.&author=TF%20Heatherton&author=LT%20Kozlowski&author=RC%20Frecker&author=KO%20Fagerstrom&volume=86&publication_year=1991&pages=1119-27&pmid=1932883&doi=10.1111/j.1360-0443.1991.tb01879.x&)

23. Rose JE. Nicotine addiction and treatment. Annu Rev Med. 1996;47:493–507. doi: 10.1146/annurev.med.47.1.493.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.med.47.1.493) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8712799/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Annu%20Rev%20Med&title=Nicotine%20addiction%20and%20treatment.&author=JE%20Rose&volume=47&publication_year=1996&pages=493-507&pmid=8712799&doi=10.1146/annurev.med.47.1.493&)

24. Russell MA. The nicotine addiction trap: a 40-year sentence for four cigarettes. Br J Addict. 1990;85:293–300. doi: 10.1111/j.1360-0443.1990.tb03085.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1360-0443.1990.tb03085.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2180512/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Br%20J%20Addict&title=The%20nicotine%20addiction%20trap:%20a%2040-year%20sentence%20for%20four%20cigarettes.&author=MA%20Russell&volume=85&publication_year=1990&pages=293-300&pmid=2180512&doi=10.1111/j.1360-0443.1990.tb03085.x&)

25. Stolerman IP, Jarvis MJ. The scientific case that nicotine is addictive. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 1995;117:2–10. doi: 10.1007/BF02245088. discussion 14-20.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02245088) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7724697/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Psychopharmacology%20(Berl)&title=The%20scientific%20case%20that%20nicotine%20is%20addictive.&author=IP%20Stolerman&author=MJ%20Jarvis&volume=117&publication_year=1995&pages=2-10&pmid=7724697&doi=10.1007/BF02245088&)

26. Haiman CA, et al. Ethnic and racial differences in the smoking-related risk of lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:333–42. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa033250.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa033250) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16436765/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N%20Engl%20J%20Med&title=Ethnic%20and%20racial%20differences%20in%20the%20smoking-related%20risk%20of%20lung%20cancer.&author=CA%20Haiman&volume=354&publication_year=2006&pages=333-42&pmid=16436765&doi=10.1056/NEJMoa033250&)

27. Stellman SD, et al. Lung cancer risk in white and black Americans. Ann Epidemiol. 2003;13:294–302. doi: 10.1016/s1047-2797(02)00420-9.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1047-2797(02)00420-9) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12684197/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann%20Epidemiol&title=Lung%20cancer%20risk%20in%20white%20and%20black%20Americans.&author=SD%20Stellman&volume=13&publication_year=2003&pages=294-302&pmid=12684197&doi=10.1016/s1047-2797(02)00420-9&)

28. Peto R, et al. Smoking, smoking cessation, and lung cancer in the UK since 1950: combination of national statistics with two case-control studies. Bmj. 2000;321:323–9. doi: 10.1136/bmj.321.7257.323.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.321.7257.323) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC27446/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10926586/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bmj&title=Smoking,%20smoking%20cessation,%20and%20lung%20cancer%20in%20the%20UK%20since%201950:%20combination%20of%20national%20statistics%20with%20two%20case-control%20studies.&author=R%20Peto&volume=321&publication_year=2000&pages=323-9&pmid=10926586&doi=10.1136/bmj.321.7257.323&)

29. Devlin B, Bacanu SA, Roeder K. Genomic Control to the extreme. Nat Genet. 2004;36:1129–30. doi: 10.1038/ng1104-1129. author reply 1131.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1104-1129) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15514657/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=Genomic%20Control%20to%20the%20extreme.&author=B%20Devlin&author=SA%20Bacanu&author=K%20Roeder&volume=36&publication_year=2004&pages=1129-30&pmid=15514657&doi=10.1038/ng1104-1129&)

30. Grant SF, et al. Variant of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene confers risk of type 2 diabetes. Nat Genet. 2006;38:320–3. doi: 10.1038/ng1732.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1732) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16415884/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=Variant%20of%20transcription%20factor%207-like%202%20(TCF7L2)%20gene%20confers%20risk%20of%20type%202%20diabetes.&author=SF%20Grant&volume=38&publication_year=2006&pages=320-3&pmid=16415884&doi=10.1038/ng1732&)

31. Gulcher JR, Kristjansson K, Gudbjartsson H, Stefansson K. Protection of privacy by third-party encryption in genetic research in Iceland. Eur J Hum Genet. 2000;8:739–42. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200530.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200530) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11039572/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20J%20Hum%20Genet&title=Protection%20of%20privacy%20by%20third-party%20encryption%20in%20genetic%20research%20in%20Iceland.&author=JR%20Gulcher&author=K%20Kristjansson&author=H%20Gudbjartsson&author=K%20Stefansson&volume=8&publication_year=2000&pages=739-42&pmid=11039572&doi=10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200530&)

32. Thorgeirsson TE, et al. Anxiety with panic disorder linked to chromosome 9q in Iceland. Am J Hum Genet. 2003;72:1221–30. doi: 10.1086/375141.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/375141) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1180274/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12679899/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Hum%20Genet&title=Anxiety%20with%20panic%20disorder%20linked%20to%20chromosome%209q%20in%20Iceland.&author=TE%20Thorgeirsson&volume=72&publication_year=2003&pages=1221-30&pmid=12679899&doi=10.1086/375141&)

33. Mueller T, et al. Factor V Leiden, prothrombin G20210A, and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase C677T mutations are not associated with chronic limb ischemia: the Linz Peripheral Arterial Disease (LIPAD) study. J Vasc Surg. 2005;41:808–15. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2005.01.039.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvs.2005.01.039) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15886665/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Vasc%20Surg&title=Factor%20V%20Leiden,%20prothrombin%20G20210A,%20and%20methylenetetrahydrofolate%20reductase%20C677T%20mutations%20are%20not%20associated%20with%20chronic%20limb%20ischemia:%20the%20Linz%20Peripheral%20Arterial%20Disease%20(LIPAD)%20study.&author=T%20Mueller&volume=41&publication_year=2005&pages=808-15&pmid=15886665&doi=10.1016/j.jvs.2005.01.039&)

34. Rutherford RB, et al. Recommended standards for reports dealing with lower extremity ischemia: revised version. J Vasc Surg. 1997;26:517–38. doi: 10.1016/s0741-5214(97)70045-4.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0741-5214(97)70045-4) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9308598/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Vasc%20Surg&title=Recommended%20standards%20for%20reports%20dealing%20with%20lower%20extremity%20ischemia:%20revised%20version.&author=RB%20Rutherford&volume=26&publication_year=1997&pages=517-38&pmid=9308598&doi=10.1016/s0741-5214(97)70045-4&)

35. Dormandy JA, Rutherford RB. Management of peripheral arterial disease (PAD). TASC Working Group. TransAtlantic Inter-Society Consensus (TASC). J Vasc Surg. 2000;31:S1–S296.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10666287/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Vasc%20Surg&title=Management%20of%20peripheral%20arterial%20disease%20(PAD).%20TASC%20Working%20Group.%20TransAtlantic%20Inter-Society%20Consensus%20(TASC).&author=JA%20Dormandy&author=RB%20Rutherford&volume=31&publication_year=2000&pages=S1-S296&pmid=10666287&)

36. Barani J, Nilsson JA, Mattiasson I, Lindblad B, Gottsater A. Inflammatory mediators are associated with 1-year mortality in critical limb ischemia. J Vasc Surg. 2005;42:75–80. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2005.03.025.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvs.2005.03.025) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16012455/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Vasc%20Surg&title=Inflammatory%20mediators%20are%20associated%20with%201-year%20mortality%20in%20critical%20limb%20ischemia.&author=J%20Barani&author=JA%20Nilsson&author=I%20Mattiasson&author=B%20Lindblad&author=A%20Gottsater&volume=42&publication_year=2005&pages=75-80&pmid=16012455&doi=10.1016/j.jvs.2005.03.025&)

37. Suggested standards for reports dealing with lower extremity ischemia. Prepared by the Ad Hoc Committee on Reporting Standards, Society for Vascular Surgery/North American Chapter, International Society for Cardiovascular Surgery. J Vasc Surg. 1986;4:80–94.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3723692/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Vasc%20Surg&title=Suggested%20standards%20for%20reports%20dealing%20with%20lower%20extremity%20ischemia.%20Prepared%20by%20the%20Ad%20Hoc%20Committee%20on%20Reporting%20Standards,%20Society%20for%20Vascular%20Surgery/North%20American%20Chapter,%20International%20Society%20for%20Cardiovascular%20Surgery.&volume=4&publication_year=1986&pages=80-94&pmid=3723692&)

38. Flex A, et al. The -174 G/C polymorphism of the interleukin-6 gene promoter is associated with peripheral artery occlusive disease. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2002;24:264–8. doi: 10.1053/ejvs.2002.1711.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1053/ejvs.2002.1711) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12217290/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20J%20Vasc%20Endovasc%20Surg&title=The%20-174%20G/C%20polymorphism%20of%20the%20interleukin-6%20gene%20promoter%20is%20associated%20with%20peripheral%20artery%20occlusive%20disease.&author=A%20Flex&volume=24&publication_year=2002&pages=264-8&pmid=12217290&doi=10.1053/ejvs.2002.1711&)

39. Barrett JC, Cardon LR. Evaluating coverage of genome-wide association studies. Nat Genet. 2006;38:659–62. doi: 10.1038/ng1801.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1801) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16715099/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=Evaluating%20coverage%20of%20genome-wide%20association%20studies.&author=JC%20Barrett&author=LR%20Cardon&volume=38&publication_year=2006&pages=659-62&pmid=16715099&doi=10.1038/ng1801&)
