# Polymorphic MLH1 and risk of cancer after methylating chemotherapy for Hodgkin lymphoma

## Metadata
**Authors:** L J Worrillow, A G Smith, K Scott, M Andersson, A J Ashcroft, G M Dores, B Glimelius, E Holowaty, G H Jackson, G L Jones, C F Lynch, G Morgan, E Pukkala, D Scott, H H Storm, P R Taylor, M Vyberg, E Willett, L B Travis, J M Allan
**Journal:** Journal of medical genetics
**Date:** 2007 Oct 24
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2007.053850](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2007.053850)
**PMID:** 17959715
**PMCID:** PMC4022773
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4022773/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4022773/pdf/nihms-579369.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4022773/pdf/nihms-579369.pdf)

## Abstract

**Background and objective:** 
Methylating agents are effective chemotherapy agents for Hodgkin lymphoma, but are associated with the development of second primary cancers. Cytotoxicity of methylating agents is mediated primarily by the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) system. Loss of MLH1, a major component of DNA MMR, results in tolerance to the cytotoxic effects of methylating agents and persistence of mutagenised cells at high risk of malignant transformation. We hypothesised that a common substitution in the basal promoter of MLH1 (position −93, rs1800734) modifies the risk of cancer after methylating chemotherapy.

**Methods:** 
133 patients who developed cancer following chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy (n=133), 420 patients diagnosed with de novo myeloid leukaemia, 242 patients diagnosed with primary Hodgkin lymphoma, and 1177 healthy controls were genotyped for the MLH1 −93 polymorphism by allelic discrimination polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction fragment length polymorphism assay. Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals for cancer risk by MLH1 −93 polymorphism status, and stratified by previous exposure to methylating chemotherapy, were calculated using unconditional logistic regression.

**Results:** 
Carrier frequency of the MLH1 −93 variant was higher in patients who developed therapy related acute myeloid leukaemia (t-AML) (75.0%, n=12) or breast cancer (53.3%. n=15) after methylating chemotherapy for Hodgkin lymphoma compared to patients without previous methylating exposure (t-AML, 30.4%, n=69; breast cancer patients, 27.2%, n=22). The MLH1 −93 variant allele was also over-represented in t-AML cases when compared to de novo AML cases (36.9%, n=420) and healthy controls (36.3%, n=952), and was associated with a significantly increased risk of developing t-AML (odds ratio 5.31, 95% confidence interval 1.40 to 20.15), but only in patients previously treated with a methylating agent.

**Conclusions:** 
These data support the hypothesis that the common polymorphism at position −93 in the core promoter of MLH1 defines a risk allele for the development of cancer after methylating chemotherapy for Hodgkin lymphoma. However, replication of this finding in larger studies is suggested.

### Background and objective

Methylating agents are effective chemotherapy agents for Hodgkin lymphoma, but are associated with the development of second primary cancers. Cytotoxicity of methylating agents is mediated primarily by the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) system. Loss of MLH1, a major component of DNA MMR, results in tolerance to the cytotoxic effects of methylating agents and persistence of mutagenised cells at high risk of malignant transformation. We hypothesised that a common substitution in the basal promoter of *MLH1* (position −93, rs1800734) modifies the risk of cancer after methylating chemotherapy.

### Methods

133 patients who developed cancer following chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy (n=133), 420 patients diagnosed with de novo myeloid leukaemia, 242 patients diagnosed with primary Hodgkin lymphoma, and 1177 healthy controls were genotyped for the *MLH1* −93 polymorphism by allelic discrimination polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction fragment length polymorphism assay. Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals for cancer risk by *MLH1* −93 polymorphism status, and stratified by previous exposure to methylating chemotherapy, were calculated using unconditional logistic regression.

### Results

Carrier frequency of the *MLH1* −93 variant was higher in patients who developed therapy related acute myeloid leukaemia (t-AML) (75.0%, n=12) or breast cancer (53.3%. n=15) after methylating chemotherapy for Hodgkin lymphoma compared to patients without previous methylating exposure (t-AML, 30.4%, n=69; breast cancer patients, 27.2%, n=22). The *MLH1* −93 variant allele was also over-represented in t-AML cases when compared to de novo AML cases (36.9%, n=420) and healthy controls (36.3%, n=952), and was associated with a significantly increased risk of developing t-AML (odds ratio 5.31, 95% confidence interval 1.40 to 20.15), but only in patients previously treated with a methylating agent.

### Conclusions

These data support the hypothesis that the common polymorphism at position −93 in the core promoter of *MLH1* defines a risk allele for the development of cancer after methylating chemotherapy for Hodgkin lymphoma. However, replication of this finding in larger studies is suggested.

## PATIENTS AND METHODS

### Study populations

Four groups were investigated: population 1 comprised 96 UK patients with pathologically confirmed AML that developed 2 or more months after chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy ([table 1](#T1)). The type of antecedent malignancy was known for 55 patients, and included 15 with breast cancer and 13 with Hodgkin lymphoma. Agent specific data on previous chemotherapy and radiotherapy were available for 81 (84%) cases, including 40 who had radiotherapy alone and 56 who had some form of chemotherapy either alone or in addition to radiotherapy. Twelve of the 96 patients had received a chemotherapeutic methylating agent (procarbazine or dacarbazine), and all of the 12 had been treated for a first primary Hodgkin lymphoma. Populations 2a and 2b comprised 420 patients with pathologically confirmed de novo AML and 952 matched controls (without leukaemia), respectively, who participated in a previous study of acute leukaemia conducted in the UK ([table 1](#T1)).^16^ Population 3 comprised 37 women treated for Hodgkin lymphoma at age 30 years or younger in North America and Scandinavia who subsequently developed pathologically confirmed breast cancer one or more years after treatment ([table 1](#T1)).^17^ Agent-specific data on previous therapy were available for all patients, with 15 having received treatment that included methylating agents. Populations 4a and 4b comprised 242 primary Hodgkin lymphoma cases and 225 matched controls, respectively, recruited as part of a lymphoma case–control study conducted in the UK.^18^

### Table 1.

|   | Population 1 | Population 2a | Population 2b | Population 3 | Population 4a | Population 4b |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Variable | t-AML casesn(%) | de novo AML casesn(%) | de novo AML controlsn(%) | Second primary breastcancer casesn(%) | Hodgkin lymphoma casn(%) | Hodgkin lymphoma controlsn(%) |
| Total | 96 (100) | 420 (100) | 952 (100) | 37 (100) | 242 (100) | 225 (100) |
| Sex |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| Male | 39 (41) | 221 (54) | 509 (53) | na | 149 (61.6) | 138 (61.3) |
| Female | 57 (59) | 193 (46) | 443 (47) | 37 (100) | 93 (38.4) | 87 (38.7) |
| Age (years) |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| Mean (range) | 54.8 (17.5–77.B) | 47.5 (16.2–70.0) | 48.1 (16.3–69.8) | 40.0 (28.0–54.0) | 40.6 (16.3–67.3) | 40.7 (16.3–65.5) |
| Prior therapy |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| Radiotherapy only | 40 (42) | na | na | 22 (59) | na | na |
| Any chemotherapy* | 56 (58) | na | na | 15 (41) | na | na |
| Alkylating agents | 28 (29) | na | na | 15 (41) | na | na |
| Methylating agents | 12 (12) | na | na | 15 (41) | na | na |
| Topoisomerase inhibitors | 17 (18) | na | na | nd | na | na |
| Anti-metabolites | 14 (15) | na | na | nd | na | na |
| Tubulin inhibitors | 16 (17) | na | na | nd | na | na |
| Corticosteroids | 18 (19) | na | na | nd | na | na |
| Details not available | 15 (16) | na | na | nd | na | na |

Table 1 Caption: Description of therapy-related AML (t-AML) and breast cancer cases, de novo AML cases and controls, Hodgkin lymphoma cases and controls, by sex, age and prior therapy

Ethical committee approval was obtained for this study. Informed consent was provided according to the Declaration of Helsinki and the study was approved by the University of York Institutional ethical review committee (Department of Biology).

### MLH1 −93 polymorphism analysis

*MLH1* −93 status was determined using either allelic discrimination PCR (forward primer 5′CATTCAAGCTGTCCAATCAATAGCT3′, reverse primer 5′CGTCTAGATGCTCAACGGAAGTG3′, G probe 5′fam-TCACGTTCTTCCTTCAGCTTACG3′, A probe 5′tet-CTCACGTTCTTCCTTTAGCTGTAGCTTACGC3′) or polymerase chain reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism assay.^19^ Assay accuracy was determined by direct sequencing and concordance between methods was 100%. Acute leukaemia patients, Hodgkin lymphoma patients and controls were genotyped using DNA extracted from peripheral blood or buccal swabs (98% of patients) or bone marrow (2% of patients). Breast cancer cases were genotyped using DNA extracted from paraffin embedded macrodissected non-tumour tissue.

### Statistical analysis

Initial analysis for t-AML and breast cancer cases was conducted by comparing methylating agent exposed second cancer cases to second cancer cases with no prior exposure to methylating agents. Further analysis for t-AML cases was performed using de novo AML cases as the reference population. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated using unconditional logistic regression,^20^ with all analyses adjusted for age and sex. Where appropriate, further adjustments were made for cancer registry (breast cancer analysis). Given that radiotherapy exposure is strongly associated with breast cancer risk after Hodgkin lymphoma,^17^ and DNA MMR status may influence cellular response to ionising radiation, the analysis of second primary breast cancers was also adjusted for radiotherapy dose. All analyses were performed using Stata 9.1 1999 (Stata, College Station, Texas, USA).

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

In order to test whether the *MLH1* −93 variant was associated with risk of t-AML in patients treated with methylating chemotherapy, we stratified the patient series (population 1) by prior exposure to these agents, and performed an analysis of exposed cases (n=12; all treated for primary Hodgkin lymphoma) versus non-exposed cases (n=69). Due to small numbers, this case:case comparison had low statistical power to detect anything other than a strong association. Nonetheless, we observed a significant association between the G>A *MLH1* −93 polymorphism and risk of t-AML after methylating chemotherapy. Specifically, carriers of the A-allele were significantly over-represented in the 12 t-AML cases whose prior exposure included a methylating chemotherapy agent (75.0%) compared to 69 t-AML cases without this exposure (30.4%) (OR for GA + AA vs GG: 5.49, 95% CI 1.18 to 25.60; p=0.03). Association with the *MLH1* −93 polymorphism was not seen when t-AML cases were stratified by any other major exposure group, including radiotherapy (30.0%), any type of chemotherapy (37.5%), DNA cross linking agents (46.4%), DNA topoisomerase inhibitors (47.1%) or anti-metabolite chemotherapy agents (20.0%).

In order to confirm that the observed association was specific to t-AML after exposure which included methylating chemotherapy, we genotyped 420 cases of de novo AML (population 2a) and 952 non-cancer controls (population 2b) ([table 2](#T2)). Carriers of the *MLH1* −93 A allele were significantly over-represented in t-AML cases with prior exposure to methylating agents (75.0%) compared to either de novo AML cases (36.9%) (OR for GA + AA vs GG: 5.31, 95% CI 1.40 to 20.15; [table 2](#T2)) or their matched controls (36.3%) (OR for GA + AA vs GG: 5.52, 95% CI 1.48 to 20.63). In contrast, there was no significant difference in *MLH1* −93 genotype distribution between de novo AML cases (36.9% carriers) and t-AML cases after chemotherapy per se (37.5% carriers) or radiotherapy alone (30.0% carriers) ([table 2](#T2)). There was also no significant difference in *MLH1* −93 genotype between de novo AML cases and their matched controls (OR for GA + AA vs GG: 1.03, 95% CI 0.80 to 1.31), or between primary Hodgkin lymphoma cases (population 4a) (34.7% carriers) and their matched controls (population 4b) (31.4% carriers) (OR for GA + AA vs GG: 1.16, 95% CI 0.78 to 1.75). These data suggest that the association seen is specific to t-AML after exposure which included methylating chemotherapy, and is not related to intrinsic risk of AML or Hodgkin lymphoma.

### Table 2.

|   |   |   | t-AML (population 1) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   |   |   |   |   | Previous treatment |  |  |  |  |  |
| MLH1 -93 status | de novo AML(population 2A)(n = 420) | Controls(population 2B)(n = 952) | t-AML(%) (n = 96) | OR(95% CI) | Any chemotheropy(%) (n = 56) | OR(95% CI) | Methylatingchemotherapy(%) (n = 12) | OR(95% CI) | Radiotherapy(%) (n = 40) | OR(95% CI) |
| GG | 246 (63.1) | 585 (63.7) | 63 (65.6) | 1 | 35 (62.5) | 1 | 3 (25.0) | 1 | 28 (70.0) | 1 |
| GA | 128 (32.8) | 292 (31.8) | 30 (31.2) | 0.91(0.56 to 1.50) | 18 (32.1) | 0.99(0.54 to 1.83) | 7 (58.3) | 4.63(1.16 to 18.43) | 12 (30.0) | 0.67(0.31 to 1.45) |
| AA | 16 (4.1) | 41 (4.5) | 3 (3.1) | 0.85(0.23 to 3.08) | 3 (5.4) | 1.36(0.37 to 4.93) | 2 (16.7) | 10.68(1.61 to 71.04) | 0 | – |
| sna | 30 | 34 | – |   | – |   | – |   | – |   |
| GG | 246 (63.1) | 585 (63.7) | 63 (65.6) | 1 | 35 (62.5) | 1 | 3 (25.0) | 1 | 28 (70.0) | 1 |
| GA+AA | 144 (36.9) | 333 (36.3) | 33 (34.4) | 0.91(0.56 to 1.47) | 21 (37.5) | 1.03(0.58 to 1.85) | 9 (75.0) | 5.31(1.40 to 20.15) | 12 (30.0) | 0.61(0.29 to 1.31) |

Table 2 Caption: Number of cancer-free controls, therapy related and de novo AML cases, adjusted odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for MLH1 -93 by previous therapeutic exposure

In addition to leukaemia, methylating agents can also cause solid tumours in animals, including mammary tumours.^21^ Given this, we determined *MLH1* polymorphism status in women who developed breast cancer after treatment for Hodgkin lymphoma (population 3).^17^ Carrier frequency for the *MLH1* −93 G>A polymorphism was increased in 15 breast cancer cases with prior exposure to methylating chemotherapy (53.3%) compared to 22 with no methylating exposure (27.2%), with the difference of borderline statistical significance (OR for GA +AA vs GG: 4.01, 95% CI 0.83 to 19.35; p=0.08). These data, albeit based on small numbers, are consistent with the results observed for t-AML.

The −93 variant lies within a protein binding site and is one of three regions of the *MLH1* promoter required for maximal transcriptional activity.^15^ As such, it is plausible that polymorphic variation in this region affects *MLH1* expression. In support of this model, site directed mutagenesis of the adenine residue two bases downstream of the −93 variant (position −91) reduces promoter activity by 75%.^15^

Due to the rarity and small number of t-AML and second primary breast cancer cases in this study, the observed associations should be viewed circumspectly. Nevertheless, these data support the hypothesis that the −93 promoter variant of *MLH1* is associated with an increased risk of developing cancer after methylating chemotherapy for Hodgkin lymphoma. These results are especially important, since second primary cancers are now the leading cause of death among long term survivors of Hodgkin lymphoma.^22^ A future goal is to identify prospectively patient subgroups with a heightened susceptibility of developing therapy-associated second cancers in order to modify planned treatment approaches.^23^ Thus, our finding adds to a growing body of research that will eventually facilitate the development of evidence based personalised medicine.

## Acknowledgments

**Funding:** We acknowledge the support of the Medical Research Council DNA/RNA bank (University College London Hospital), a facility funded by the Kay Kendall Leukaemia Fund). The leukaemia work was supported by the Leukaemia Research Fund of the United Kingdom. The breast cancer work was supported in part by the Intramural Research Program of the United States National Cancer Institute, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics.

## Footnotes

## References

1. Dores GM, Metayer C, Curtis RE, Lynch CF, Clarke EA, Glimelius B, Storm H, Pukkala E, van Leeuwen FE, Holowaty EJ, Andersson M, Wiklund T, Joensuu T, Van’t Veer MB, Stovall M, Gospodarowicz M, Travis LB. Second malignant neoplasms among long-term survivors of Hodgkin’s disease: a population-based evaluation over 25 years. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:3484–94. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2002.09.038.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2002.09.038) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12177110/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Second%20malignant%20neoplasms%20among%20long-term%20survivors%20of%20Hodgkin%E2%80%99s%20disease:%20a%20population-based%20evaluation%20over%2025%20years&author=GM%20Dores&author=C%20Metayer&author=RE%20Curtis&author=CF%20Lynch&author=EA%20Clarke&volume=20&publication_year=2002&pages=3484-94&pmid=12177110&doi=10.1200/JCO.2002.09.038&)

2. Schonfeld SJ, Gilbert ES, Dores GM, Lynch CF, Hodgson DC, Hall P, Storm H, Andersen A, Pukkala E, Holowaty E, Kaijser M, Andersson M, Joensuu H, Fossa SD, Allan JM, Travis LB. Acute myeloid leukaemia following Hodgkin lymphoma: a population-based study of 35,511 patients. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006;98:215–18. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djj017.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djj017) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16449681/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Natl%20Cancer%20Inst&title=Acute%20myeloid%20leukaemia%20following%20Hodgkin%20lymphoma:%20a%20population-based%20study%20of%2035,511%20patients&author=SJ%20Schonfeld&author=ES%20Gilbert&author=GM%20Dores&author=CF%20Lynch&author=DC%20Hodgson&volume=98&publication_year=2006&pages=215-18&pmid=16449681&doi=10.1093/jnci/djj017&)

3. Josting A, Wiedenmann S, Franklin J, May M, Sieber M, Wolf J, Engert A, Diehl V. Secondary myeloid leukaemia and myelodysplastic syndromes in patients treated for Hodgkin’s disease: a report from the German Hodgkin’s Lymphoma Study Group. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21:3440–6. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2003.07.160.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2003.07.160) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12668650/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Secondary%20myeloid%20leukaemia%20and%20myelodysplastic%20syndromes%20in%20patients%20treated%20for%20Hodgkin%E2%80%99s%20disease:%20a%20report%20from%20the%20German%20Hodgkin%E2%80%99s%20Lymphoma%20Study%20Group&author=A%20Josting&author=S%20Wiedenmann&author=J%20Franklin&author=M%20May&author=M%20Sieber&volume=21&publication_year=2003&pages=3440-6&pmid=12668650&doi=10.1200/JCO.2003.07.160&)

4. Travis LB, Gospodarowicz M, Curtis RE, Clarke EA, Andersson M, Glimelius B, Joensuu T, Lynch CF, van Leeuwen FE, Holowaty E, Storm H, Glimelius I, Pukkala E, Stovall M, Fraumeni JF, Jr, Boice JD, Jr, Gilbert E. Lung cancer following chemotherapy and radiotherapy for Hodgkin’s disease. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2002;94:182–92. doi: 10.1093/jnci/94.3.182.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/94.3.182) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11830608/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Natl%20Cancer%20Inst&title=Lung%20cancer%20following%20chemotherapy%20and%20radiotherapy%20for%20Hodgkin%E2%80%99s%20disease&author=LB%20Travis&author=M%20Gospodarowicz&author=RE%20Curtis&author=EA%20Clarke&author=M%20Andersson&volume=94&publication_year=2002&pages=182-92&pmid=11830608&doi=10.1093/jnci/94.3.182&)

5. Hodgson DC, Gilbert ES, Dores GM, Schonfeld SJ, Lynch CF, Storm H, Hall P, Langmark F, Pukkala E, Andersson M, Kaijser M, Joensuu H, Fossa SD, Travis LB. Long-term solid cancer risk among 5-year survivors of Hodgkin’s lymphoma. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:1489–97. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2006.09.0936.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2006.09.0936) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17372278/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Long-term%20solid%20cancer%20risk%20among%205-year%20survivors%20of%20Hodgkin%E2%80%99s%20lymphoma&author=DC%20Hodgson&author=ES%20Gilbert&author=GM%20Dores&author=SJ%20Schonfeld&author=CF%20Lynch&volume=25&publication_year=2007&pages=1489-97&pmid=17372278&doi=10.1200/JCO.2006.09.0936&)

6. Loveless A. Possible relevance of O-6 alkylation of deoxyguanosine to the mutagenicity and carcinogenicity of nitrosamines and nitrosamides. Nature. 1969;223:206–7. doi: 10.1038/223206a0.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/223206a0) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/5791738/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=Possible%20relevance%20of%20O-6%20alkylation%20of%20deoxyguanosine%20to%20the%20mutagenicity%20and%20carcinogenicity%20of%20nitrosamines%20and%20nitrosamides&author=A%20Loveless&volume=223&publication_year=1969&pages=206-7&pmid=5791738&doi=10.1038/223206a0&)

7. Margison GP, Santibanez Koref MF, Povey AC. Mechanisms of carcinogenicity/chemotherapy by O6-methylguanine. Mutagenesis. 2002;17:483–7. doi: 10.1093/mutage/17.6.483.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/mutage/17.6.483) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12435845/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mutagenesis&title=Mechanisms%20of%20carcinogenicity/chemotherapy%20by%20O6-methylguanine&author=GP%20Margison&author=MF%20Santibanez%20Koref&author=AC%20Povey&volume=17&publication_year=2002&pages=483-7&pmid=12435845&doi=10.1093/mutage/17.6.483&)

8. Iyer RR, Pluciennik A, Burdett V, Modrich PL. DNA mismatch repair: functions and mechanisms. Chem Rev. 2006;106:302–23. doi: 10.1021/cr0404794.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1021/cr0404794) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16464007/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Chem%20Rev&title=DNA%20mismatch%20repair:%20functions%20and%20mechanisms&author=RR%20Iyer&author=A%20Pluciennik&author=V%20Burdett&author=PL%20Modrich&volume=106&publication_year=2006&pages=302-23&pmid=16464007&doi=10.1021/cr0404794&)

9. Griffin S, Branch P, Xu YZ, Karran P. DNA mismatch binding and incision at modified guanine bases by extracts of mammalian cells: implications for tolerance to DNA methylation damage. Biochemistry. 1994;33:4787–93. doi: 10.1021/bi00182a006.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi00182a006) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8161538/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biochemistry&title=DNA%20mismatch%20binding%20and%20incision%20at%20modified%20guanine%20bases%20by%20extracts%20of%20mammalian%20cells:%20implications%20for%20tolerance%20to%20DNA%20methylation%20damage&author=S%20Griffin&author=P%20Branch&author=YZ%20Xu&author=P%20Karran&volume=33&publication_year=1994&pages=4787-93&pmid=8161538&doi=10.1021/bi00182a006&)

10. York SJ, Modrich P. Mismatch repair-dependent iterative excision at irreparable O6-methylguanine lesions in human nuclear extracts. J Biol Chem. 2006;281:22674–83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M603667200.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M603667200) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2234603/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16772289/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Biol%20Chem&title=Mismatch%20repair-dependent%20iterative%20excision%20at%20irreparable%20O6-methylguanine%20lesions%20in%20human%20nuclear%20extracts&author=SJ%20York&author=P%20Modrich&volume=281&publication_year=2006&pages=22674-83&pmid=16772289&doi=10.1074/jbc.M603667200&)

11. Allan JM, Wild CP, Rollinson S, Willett EV, Moorman AV, Dovey GJ, Roddam PL, Roman E, Cartwright RA, Morgan GJ. Polymorphism in glutathione S-transferase P1 is associated with susceptibility to chemotherapy-induced leukaemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001;98:11592–7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.191211198.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.191211198) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC58774/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11553769/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20U%20S%20A&title=Polymorphism%20in%20glutathione%20S-transferase%20P1%20is%20associated%20with%20susceptibility%20to%20chemotherapy-induced%20leukaemia&author=JM%20Allan&author=CP%20Wild&author=S%20Rollinson&author=EV%20Willett&author=AV%20Moorman&volume=98&publication_year=2001&pages=11592-7&pmid=11553769&doi=10.1073/pnas.191211198&)

12. Park SH, Lee GY, Jeon HS, Lee SJ, Kim KM, Jang SS, Kim CH, Lee WK, Kam S, Park RW, Kim IS, Jung TH, Park JY. -93G—.A polymorphism of hMLH1 and risk of primary lung cancer. Int J Cancer. 2004;112:678–82. doi: 10.1002/ijc.20359.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.20359) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15382050/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int%20J%20Cancer&title=-93G%E2%80%94.A%20polymorphism%20of%20hMLH1%20and%20risk%20of%20primary%20lung%20cancer&author=SH%20Park&author=GY%20Lee&author=HS%20Jeon&author=SJ%20Lee&author=KM%20Kim&volume=112&publication_year=2004&pages=678-82&pmid=15382050&doi=10.1002/ijc.20359&)

13. Raptis S, Mrkonjic M, Green RC, Pethe VV, Monga N, Chan YM, Daftary D, Dicks E, Younghusband BH, Parfrey PS, Gallinger SS, McLaughlin JR, Knight JA, Bapat B. MLH1 −93G.A promoter polymorphism and the risk of microsatellite-unstable colorectal cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;99:463–74. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djk095.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djk095) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17374836/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Natl%20Cancer%20Inst&title=MLH1%20%E2%88%9293G.A%20promoter%20polymorphism%20and%20the%20risk%20of%20microsatellite-unstable%20colorectal%20cancer&author=S%20Raptis&author=M%20Mrkonjic&author=RC%20Green&author=VV%20Pethe&author=N%20Monga&volume=99&publication_year=2007&pages=463-74&pmid=17374836&doi=10.1093/jnci/djk095&)

14. Beiner ME, Rosen B, Fyles A, Harley I, Pal T, Siminovitch K, Zhang S, Sun P, Narod SA. Endometrial cancer risk is associated with variants of the mismatch repair genes MLH1 and MSH2. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2006;15:1636–40. doi: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-06-0257.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-06-0257) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16985024/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Epidemiol%20Biomarkers%20Prev&title=Endometrial%20cancer%20risk%20is%20associated%20with%20variants%20of%20the%20mismatch%20repair%20genes%20MLH1%20and%20MSH2&author=ME%20Beiner&author=B%20Rosen&author=A%20Fyles&author=I%20Harley&author=T%20Pal&volume=15&publication_year=2006&pages=1636-40&pmid=16985024&doi=10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-06-0257&)

15. Arita M, Zhong X, Min Z, Hemmi H, Shimatake H. Multiple sites required for expression in 59-flanking region of the hMLH1 gene. Gene. 2003;306:57–65. doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(03)00385-8.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0378-1119(03)00385-8) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12657467/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gene&title=Multiple%20sites%20required%20for%20expression%20in%2059-flanking%20region%20of%20the%20hMLH1%20gene&author=M%20Arita&author=X%20Zhong&author=Z%20Min&author=H%20Hemmi&author=H%20Shimatake&volume=306&publication_year=2003&pages=57-65&pmid=12657467&doi=10.1016/s0378-1119(03)00385-8&)

16. Kane EV, Roman E, Cartwright R, Parker J, Morgan G. Tobacco and the risk of acute leukaemia in adults. Br J Cancer. 1999;81:1228–33. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6690833.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bjc.6690833) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2374333/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10584886/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Br%20J%20Cancer&title=Tobacco%20and%20the%20risk%20of%20acute%20leukaemia%20in%20adults&author=EV%20Kane&author=E%20Roman&author=R%20Cartwright&author=J%20Parker&author=G%20Morgan&volume=81&publication_year=1999&pages=1228-33&pmid=10584886&doi=10.1038/sj.bjc.6690833&)

17. Travis LB, Hill DA, Dores GM, Gospodarowicz M, van Leeuwen FE, Holowaty E, Glimelius B, Andersson M, Wiklund T, Lynch CF, Van’t Veer MB, Glimelius I, Storm H, Pukkala E, Stovall M, Curtis R, Boice JD, Jr, Gilbert E. Breast cancer following radiotherapy and chemotherapy among young women with Hodgkin disease. JAMA. 2003;290:465–75. doi: 10.1001/jama.290.4.465.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.290.4.465) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12876089/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=JAMA&title=Breast%20cancer%20following%20radiotherapy%20and%20chemotherapy%20among%20young%20women%20with%20Hodgkin%20disease&author=LB%20Travis&author=DA%20Hill&author=GM%20Dores&author=M%20Gospodarowicz&author=FE%20van%20Leeuwen&volume=290&publication_year=2003&pages=465-75&pmid=12876089&doi=10.1001/jama.290.4.465&)

18. Willett EV, O’Connor S, Smith AG, Roman E. Does smoking or alcohol modify the risk of Epstein-Barr virus genome-positive or -negative Hodgkin lymphoma? Epidemiology. 2007;18:130–6. doi: 10.1097/01.ede.0000248899.47399.78.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.ede.0000248899.47399.78) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17099321/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Epidemiology&title=Does%20smoking%20or%20alcohol%20modify%20the%20risk%20of%20Epstein-Barr%20virus%20genome-positive%20or%20-negative%20Hodgkin%20lymphoma?&author=EV%20Willett&author=S%20O%E2%80%99Connor&author=AG%20Smith&author=E%20Roman&volume=18&publication_year=2007&pages=130-6&pmid=17099321&doi=10.1097/01.ede.0000248899.47399.78&)

19. Ito E, Yanagisawa Y, Iwahashi Y, Suzuki Y, Nagasaki H, Akiyama Y, Sugano S, Yuasa Y, Maruyama K. A core promoter and a frequent single-nucleotide polymorphism of the mismatch repair gene hMLH1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999;256:488–94. doi: 10.1006/bbrc.1999.0368.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.1999.0368) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10080925/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biochem%20Biophys%20Res%20Commun&title=A%20core%20promoter%20and%20a%20frequent%20single-nucleotide%20polymorphism%20of%20the%20mismatch%20repair%20gene%20hMLH1&author=E%20Ito&author=Y%20Yanagisawa&author=Y%20Iwahashi&author=Y%20Suzuki&author=H%20Nagasaki&volume=256&publication_year=1999&pages=488-94&pmid=10080925&doi=10.1006/bbrc.1999.0368&)

20. Breslow NE, Day NE. Statistical methods in cancer research: The analysis of case-control studies volume 1. International Agency for Research in Cancer; Lyon: 1980. Classical methods of analysis of matched data; pp. 162–89.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7216345/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Statistical%20methods%20in%20cancer%20research:%20The%20analysis%20of%20case-control%20studies%20volume%201&author=NE%20Breslow&author=NE%20Day&publication_year=1980&)

21. World Health Organisation. International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) IARC monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans, overall evaluation of carcinogenicity: an updating of IARC monographs 1–42. IARC Mongr Eval Carcinog Risks Hum Suppl. 1987;(Supplement 7)  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3482203/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=IARC%20Mongr%20Eval%20Carcinog%20Risks%20Hum%20Suppl&title=IARC%20monographs%20on%20the%20evaluation%20of%20carcinogenic%20risks%20to%20humans,%20overall%20evaluation%20of%20carcinogenicity:%20an%20updating%20of%20IARC%20monographs%201%E2%80%9342&issue=Supplement%207&publication_year=1987&pmid=3482203&)

22. van Leeuwen FE, Travis LB. Cancer: principles and practice of oncology. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins; Philadelphia: 2005. Second cancers; pp. 2575–602.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Cancer:%20principles%20and%20practice%20of%20oncology&author=FE%20van%20Leeuwen&author=LB%20Travis&publication_year=2005&)

23. Travis LB, Rabkin CS, Brown LM, Allan JM, Alter BP, Ambrosone CB, Begg CB, Caporaso N, Chanock S, DeMichele A, Figg WD, Gospodarowicz MK, Hall EJ, Hisada M, Inskip P, Kleinerman R, Little JB, Malkin D, Ng AK, Offit K, Pui CH, Robison LL, Rothman N, Shields PG, Strong L, Taniguchi T, Tucker MA, Greene MH. Cancer survivorship—genetic susceptibility and second primary cancers: research strategies and recommendations. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006;98:15–25. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djj001.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djj001) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16391368/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Natl%20Cancer%20Inst&title=Cancer%20survivorship%E2%80%94genetic%20susceptibility%20and%20second%20primary%20cancers:%20research%20strategies%20and%20recommendations&author=LB%20Travis&author=CS%20Rabkin&author=LM%20Brown&author=JM%20Allan&author=BP%20Alter&volume=98&publication_year=2006&pages=15-25&pmid=16391368&doi=10.1093/jnci/djj001&)
