# Response to the dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors in Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes might be associated with a diplotype of two single nucleotide polymorphisms on the interleukin-6 promoter region under a certain level of physical activity

## Metadata
**Authors:** Mizue Matsui, Yoshihiko Takahashi, Noriko Takebe, Kazuma Takahashi, Kan Nagasawa, Hiroyuki Honma, Tomoyasu Oda, Mitsutaka Ono, Riyuki Nakagawa, Takayoshi Sasai, Hirobumi Togashi, Mari Hangai, Takashi Kajiwara, Haruhito Taneichi, Yasushi Ishigaki, Jo Satoh
**Journal:** Journal of Diabetes Investigation
**Date:** 2014 Jul 25
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdi.12260](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdi.12260)
**PMID:** 25802725
**PMCID:** PMC4364852
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4364852/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4364852/pdf/jdi0006-0173.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4364852/pdf/jdi0006-0173.pdf)

## Abstract

**Aims/Introduction:** 
Muscle-derived interleukin-6 (IL-6) has been reported to promote glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) secretion, and we explored the association of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human IL-6 promoter region with the responsiveness to dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors (DPP-4Is), drugs that increase circulating GLP-1.

**Materials and Methods:** 
The present observational study enrolled Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes who took a DPP-4I over 3 months, and most of the clinical information was collected retrospectively. We defined non-responders as those having less than a 0.2% decrease of the glycated hemoglobin level at 3 or 4 months after starting DPP-4I treatment. Physical activity was retrospectively estimated by the Japanese short version of International Physical Activity Questionnaire.

**Results:** 
We studied 316 patients whose physical activity corresponding to the season of the DPP-4I administration was estimated. The non-responder rate was 29.7%. We analyzed rs1800796 and rs2097677, both are suggested to be functional in Japanese. Multivariate analysis for all patients showed that the adjusted odds ratio for the non-responder risk of the diplotype rs1800796 G/*–rs2097677 A/* against C/C-G/G (OR_G*A*) was 0.445 (P = 0.068). When patients were stratified by the International Physical Activity Questionnaire into low (n = 149) and moderate/high (n = 167) activity groups, however, OR_G*A* in each group was 1.58 (P = 0.615) and 0.153 (P = 0.003), respectively.

**Conclusions:** 
The diplotype rs1800796 G/*–rs2097677 A/* might contribute to responsiveness to DPP-4Is in Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes under a certain level of physical activity. However, further investigation is warranted to confirm this.

Keywords: Glucagon-like peptide-1, Interleukin-6, Single nucleotide polymorphism

### Aims/Introduction

Muscle-derived interleukin-6 (IL-6) has been reported to promote glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) secretion, and we explored the association of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human IL-6 promoter region with the responsiveness to dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors (DPP-4Is), drugs that increase circulating GLP-1.

### Materials and Methods

The present observational study enrolled Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes who took a DPP-4I over 3 months, and most of the clinical information was collected retrospectively. We defined non-responders as those having less than a 0.2% decrease of the glycated hemoglobin level at 3 or 4 months after starting DPP-4I treatment. Physical activity was retrospectively estimated by the Japanese short version of International Physical Activity Questionnaire.

### Results

We studied 316 patients whose physical activity corresponding to the season of the DPP-4I administration was estimated. The non-responder rate was 29.7%. We analyzed rs1800796 and rs2097677, both are suggested to be functional in Japanese. Multivariate analysis for all patients showed that the adjusted odds ratio for the non-responder risk of the diplotype rs1800796 G/*–rs2097677 A/* against C/C-G/G (OR_G*A*) was 0.445 (*P* = 0.068). When patients were stratified by the International Physical Activity Questionnaire into low (*n* = 149) and moderate/high (*n* = 167) activity groups, however, OR_G*A* in each group was 1.58 (*P* = 0.615) and 0.153 (*P* = 0.003), respectively.

### Conclusions

The diplotype rs1800796 G/*–rs2097677 A/* might contribute to responsiveness to DPP-4Is in Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes under a certain level of physical activity. However, further investigation is warranted to confirm this.

## Introduction

Recently, dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors (DPP-4Is) have increasingly been used for patients with type 2 diabetes worldwide. This class of antidiabetic drugs specifically inhibits DPP-4, which breaks down glucagon-like peptide (GLP)-1 and gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP). Consequently, DPP-4Is increase plasma levels of these two gut hormones. GLP-1 and GIP stimulate insulin secretion in a blood glucose level-dependent manner, and GLP-1 has the ability to inhibit glucagon secretion. These peptides are thus expected to improve the outcomes of the treatment for patients with type 2 diabetes, as there is little risk of hypoglycemia or weight gain, and both are suggested to exert a protective effect on pancreatic β-cells[1](#b1). Interestingly, a recent meta-analysis showed that DPP-4Is decrease glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) levels more markedly in Asians than in non-Asians[2](#b2), and clinical factors for unresponsiveness to DPP-4Is have in fact been more intensively studied in Asian subjects[3](#b3)^–^[9](#b9). However, no genetic factors are known to be responsible for the efficacy of DPP-4Is.

To explore the role of genetic factors in unresponsiveness to DPP-4Is, we focused on a recent report stating that in animal models, interleukin-6 (IL-6) derived from muscle cells during exercise enhances GLP-1 synthesis and secretion by intestinal L cells, and also affects pancreatic α-cell properties[10](#b10). Although this apparently novel cytokine network in patients with type 2 diabetes has yet to be elucidated, human studies suggest that physical training could enhance insulin secretory capacity in type 2 diabetes[11](#b11), and postprandial exercise acutely improved GLP-1 secretion in non-obese healthy subjects[12](#b12). If systemically elevated IL-6 works similarly in humans, genetic variants that are known to enhance the transcription of IL-6 might improve GLP-1 synthesis and secretion. A harmonious relationship between the exercise-induced increase in GLP-1 and inhibition of DPP-4 throughout the day would result in a sustained elevation of circulating GLP-1. Herein, we hypothesized that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the IL-6 promoter region might be associated with the efficacy of DPP-4Is, and explored this possible association in Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes.

## Materials and Methods

### Study Participants

We carried out an observational study of Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes who visited the Division of Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, Iwate Medical University, Morioka, Japan, between 1 December 2009 and 31 March 2013. We screened all outpatients at our department who had taken one of the available DPP-4 inhibitors for the first time (*n* = 426). Exclusion criteria were: (i) hospital admission within half a year of starting a DPP-4I; (ii) moderate to severe liver disease; (iii) renal failure; (iv) steroid therapy; (v) recent resumption of antidiabetic medication; and (vi) any type of ongoing anticancer therapy. Ultimately, 331 eligible patients participated in the present study. We obtained written informed consent from all of the participants according to the Declaration of Helsinki. The present study was approved by the institutional ethics committee of Iwate Medical University.

### Diagnostic Criteria

The diagnosis of type 2 diabetes mellitus was confirmed by specialists in our department. Hypertension was defined as having at least one of the following: (i) systolic blood pressure 140 mmHg or more; (ii) diastolic blood pressure 90 mmHg or more; and/or (iii) current medication. Likewise, dyslipidemia was defined as having at least one of the following: (i) low-density lipoprotein cholesterol 140 mg/dL (3.1 mmol/L) or more; (ii) fasting triglyceride 150 mg/dL (1.69 mmol/l) or more; (iii) high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol <40 mg/dL (1.03 mmol/L), and/or (iv) current medication. At baseline, blood samples were obtained *ad libitum*. Lipid counts at baseline were missing in one patient, and data at 1 month before the start of a DPP-4I were used to evaluate dyslipidemia in this patient. Obesity was defined as body mass index (BMI) ≥25 kg/m^2^ according to the Japan Association for the Study of Obesity.

### Management of Diabetes

Diabetes was managed by the patient's physician, and the use of any other type of antidiabetic medication(s) together with a DPP-4I was allowed so long as it was covered by the public insurance system of Japan. It should be noted that when a DPP-4I was given as an add-on therapy with sulfonylurea (SU), the dose of sulfonylurea was reduced according to the recommendation of the Japan Diabetes Society (JDS), because of an unexpectedly high incidence of severe hypoglycemia[5](#b5). However, such a dose reduction reportedly does not diminish efficacy[5](#b5). The interval of the hospital visits was also determined by physicians, and patients visited our hospital every 1, 2 or 3 months.

### Data Collection and the Outcome Definition

As aforementioned, patients were recruited at least 3 months after starting treatment with a DPP-4I, and the laboratory data, medical history and anthropometric data before recruitment were retrospectively obtained from medical records. BMI was computed from the measurement of height at the first visit to our hospital and the self-reported weight at every visit to our hospital department. The HbA1c value (%) was converted to the National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program equivalent by the JDS formula[13](#b13). The outcome was the HbA1c reduction at 3 months, and if that value was not available, the 4-month HbA1c value was used instead (17.4% of participants). Then, non-responders were defined as those who had less than a 0.2% decrease in the outcome HbA1c value, which was a little more stringent than the definition in some preceding studies[3](#b3)^,^[5](#b5). Serum C-peptide, serum high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP), plasma glucagon and plasma IL-6 at rest were examined on the day of recruitment or at the first visit after recruitment, and therefore only the post-treatment data were available for these counts.

### Estimation of Physical Activity by Questionnaire

Because of the study design, we could not ascertain physical activity during the observational period. Instead, we computed an estimation of physical activity at the start of a DPP-4I as follows. We gave patients a short Japanese version of the International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ) twice[14](#b14); the first was from 1 November 2012 to 31 May 2013 (winter-to-spring session) and the second from 1 July 2013 to 30 September 2013 (summer-to-autumn session). The former IPAQ was carried out at the time of recruitment. Total metabolic equivalents (METs)-min/week were computed according to the literature[15](#b15) by multiplying the intensity of the activity and the corresponding duration in a week. All patients provided their activities during the winter-to-spring session, but 37 of the 331 patients moved to other hospitals, and we were thus unable to obtain summer-to-autumn session data from them. We decided to use either of the IPAQ data according to the season in which each patient had started the DPP-4I, and consequently 316 out of 331 patients were able to be analyzed.

### Identification of SNPs in the IL-6 Promoter Region

Peripheral blood samples were once frozen in special sample tubes, stored in a freezer and the bulk of the anonymous samples were sent to an external laboratory for genotyping (BEX Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Each SNP was identified by the Q-probe method.

### Statistical Analysis

Data are shown as numbers with percentages or means ± standard deviation, or as medians with an interquartile range (IQR; 25–75%). Continuous variables were compared by the unpaired *t*-test, Mann–Whitney *U*-test or Kruskal–Wallis test where appropriate. The categorical variables were compared by Fisher's exact test or the χ^2^-test. Then, binary logistic regression analysis was carried out to detect the predictors for non-responders to DPP-4Is. Haplotype estimation was carried out using Arlequin 3.11[16](#b16). Statistical analyses were carried out using spss 17.0 (IBM Japan Ltd, Tokyo, Japan).

## Results

We studied a total of 316 Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes, and 94 (29.7%) were defined as non-responders to DPP-4Is. Baseline characteristics are shown in Table[1](#tbl1), and information on DPP-4Is and other classes of antidiabetic medication are in Table[2](#tbl2). The proportion of four DPP-4Is prescribed to the responders and non-responders was not significantly different. In the univariate analysis, the baseline HbA1c level was significantly higher in responders than in non-responders, and also the duration since being diagnosed with diabetes was longer in the responders (Table[1](#tbl1)). Almost no change in BMI was observed in either responders or non-responders during DPP-4I treatment (data not shown). The plasma IL-6 level at rest after 3 or more months of treatment was 1.8 ng/mL (IQR 1.2–3.0) in responders and 2.2 ng/mL (IQR 1.5–3.1) in non-responders (*P* = 0.091). The hsCRP level was 0.054 mg/dL (IQR 0.026–0.149) in responders and 0.083 mg/dL (0.028–0.175) in non-responders (*P* = 0.308). hsCRP correlated significantly with BMI levels in the present study (Spearman's correlation coefficient [SC] 0.301, *P* < 0.001)[17](#b17), but IL-6 did not, although hsCRP and IL-6 levels correlated significantly with each other (SC 0.553, *P* < 0.001). Lower physical activity correlates with higher circulating IL-6 at rest[18](#b18), and in the present study the levels of plasma IL-6 at rest measured in the winter-to-spring session showed a significant negative correlation with METs-min/week in that session (SC –0.206, *P* < 0.001). In patients who completed IPAQ twice (*n* = 294), the two estimates of physical activity had a significant correlation (SC 0.313, *P* < 0.001).

### Table 1.

| Variables | Responders (n = 222) | Non-responders (n = 94) | P |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Sex, men (%) | 143 (64.4) | 65 (69.1) | 0.496 |
| Age (years) | 62.9 ± 11.8 | 62.9 ± 11.5 | 0.980 |
| Body mass index (kg/m²) | 24.6 ± 3.97 | 24.4 ± 4.69 | 0.610 |
| Duration of diabetes (years) | 12.2 ± 8.77 | 9.46 ± 7.92 | 0.010 |
| Hypertension, n (%) | 155 (69.8) | 59 (62.7) | 0.274 |
| Antihypertensive medication, n (%) | 142 (64.0) | 53 (56.4) | 0.205 |
| Dyslipidemia, n (%) | 151 (68.0) | 63 (67.0) | 0.967 |
| Antidyslipidemic medication, n (%) | 134 (60.4) | 58 (61.7) | 0.823 |
| Family history of diabetes, n (%) | 134 (60.4) | 57 (60.6) | >0.999 |
| Smoking (never/ex/current), n (%) | 115/59/48 (51.8/26.6/21.6) | 44/33/17 (46.8/35.1/18.1) | 0.304 |
| Habitual drinking, n (%) | 122 (55.0) | 66 (70.2) | 0.016 |
| Casual plasma glucose (mmol/L) | 9.40 ± 2.98 | 8.76 ± 3.26 | 0.091 |
| Baseline HbA1c (%) | 7.72 ± 0.99 | 7.23 ± 1.35 | <0.001 |
| (IFCC, mmol/mol) | 60.9 ± 10.8 | 55.5 ± 14.8 |   |
| Change in HbA1c levels from the baseline | –0.80 ± 0.47 | 0.28 ± 0.47 | <0.001 |
| LDL cholesterol (mmol/L) | 2.62 ± 0.71* | 2.58 ± 0.65 | 0.647 |
| HDL cholesterol (mmol/L) | 1.52 ± 0.39* | 1.53 ± 0.41 | 0.793 |
| METs – min/week, median (IQR) |  |  |  |
| Winter-to-spring session (n = 316) | 785 (198–2374) | 767 (480–1880) | 0.637 |
| Summer-to-autumn session (n = 294) | 990 (297–2822)† | 900 (308–2538)‡ | 0.801 |
| Corresponding to the start of DPP-4Is | 870 (252–2420) | 836 (484–1734) | 0.784 |

Table 1 Caption: Characteristics of patients according to responsiveness and non-responsiveness to dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors

### Table 2.

| Variables | Responders (n = 222) | Non-responders (n = 94) | P |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Administered DPP-4Is (n) |   |   | 0.526 |
| Sitagliptin | 164 | 65 |   |
| Vildagliptin | 21 | 15 |   |
| Alogliptin | 34 | 13 |   |
| Linagliptin | 2 | 1 |   |
| Teneligliptin | 1 | 0 |   |
| Way of the administration of DPP-4Is (n) |  |  | <0.001 |
| First-time monotherapy | 34 | 4 |   |
| Switch from an OHA | 36 | 35 |   |
| Add-on | 104 | 31 |   |
| Add-on with a dose-reduction of an SU | 27 | 7 |   |
| Add-on with a dose-reduction of another medication (except SU) | 21 | 17 |   |
| Additional medications at the start, n (%) |  |  |  |
| None | 45 (20.3) | 24 (25.5) | 0.301 |
| Insulin | 55 (24.8) | 29 (30.9) | 0.328 |
| Sulfonylurea | 79 (35.6) | 30 (31.9) | 0.618 |
| Metformin | 101 (45.4) | 23 (24.5) | <0.001 |
| α-Glucosidase inhibitor | 59 (26.6) | 27 (28.7) | 0.800 |
| Thiazolidinedione | 30 (13.5) | 10 (10.6) | 0.605 |

Table 2 Caption: Medication for diabetes in responders and non-responders

### Effects of Individual IL-6 SNPs on the Risk of Being a Non-Responder

Rs1800795 has been implicated in immunological and metabolic abnormalities[19](#b19), but all patients in the present study had only the G allele, which has been confirmed in subjects of Japanese ethnicity[20](#b20). The rs1800796 G allele was reported to be associated with higher plasma IL-6 levels in normal Han Chinese[21](#b21) and Asian patients with type 2 diabetes[22](#b22)^,^[23](#b23), whereas it was associated with a lower level of IL-6 in Hong Kong Chinese[24](#b24). The rs2097677 A allele was identified in a large cohort of Japanese using CRP levels as a biomarker[25](#b25), although this has not been replicated in other ethnicities[26](#b26), and its effect on patients with type 2 diabetes is unknown. Herein, we analyzed the latter two SNPs.

First, we tested the single locus effect of rs1800796 or rs2097677 on the risk of non-responsiveness to DPP-4Is. There was no significant difference in non-responder rates between the rs1800796 and rs2097677 genotypes (Table[3](#tbl3), upper). Next, we analyzed the effects of diplotypes composed of the two loci, but there was no significant difference in non-responder rates between different diplotypes (Table[3](#tbl3), lower). Multiple SNPs on a promoter region might have a cis-effect on regulation of the gene transcription[27](#b27)^,^[28](#b28). Then we computed estimations of haplotype frequencies[16](#b16), but found no significant difference between responders and non-responders (Appendix S1). There were no significant differences in plasma IL-6 or hsCRP levels under DPP-4I treatment among different genotypes or diplotypes of these SNPs (data not shown).

### Table 3.

| SNP | Genotype | Responders (n) | Non-responders (n) | Non-responder rates | P |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Genotypes of each locus |  |  |  |  |  |
| rs1800796 | C/C | 141 | 66 | 0.319 | 0.494 |
| G/C | 74 | 25 | 0.253 |  |  |
| G/G | 7 | 3 | 0.300 |  |  |
| rs2097677 | G/G | 139 | 66 | 0.322 | 0.244 |
| A/G | 77 | 24 | 0.278 |  |  |
| A/A | 6 | 4 | 0.400 |  |  |

Table 3 Caption: Summary of the genotypes and diplotypes of the two single nucleotide polymorphism loci in the interleukin-6 promoter region

### Effect of Diplotypes of the Two SNPs on Non-Responders

The analysis described here failed to identify any significant effect of SNPs *per se*, but the assumed source of IL-6 in the present study was muscle, and physical activity might exert an effect on unresponsiveness to DPP-4Is. In addition, adipose tissue is known to be responsible for chronic elevation of circulating IL-6, although the plasma IL-6 level at rest and BMI had no significant correlation in the present study. Also, clinical outcome would presumably be a composite effect of the two SNPs rather than a single locus effect. Here, it would be rational to evaluate the role of IL-6 SNPs on the basis of the diplotypes of the two SNPs, physical activity and BMI levels.

Before the multivariate analysis, we analyzed the plasma IL-6 levels in the four diplotypes composed of the two SNPs between groups having different physical activity levels. According to the literature, the duration and intensity of exercise are important factors for substantially raising the circulating IL-6 level in humans, and as such the sum of short bouts of low-intensity exercise might not lead to an increase in the circulating IL-6 level sufficient to exert a meaningful systemic effect[29](#b29). To better reflect the intensity of exercise, we used a generalized and intensity-based categorization (low, moderate and high)[15](#b15). It should be noted that only the IL-6 levels at rest in the winter-to-spring session were measured, and the measures are presumed not to directly correlate with the exercise-induced IL-6 secretion. Approximately half of the patients belonged to the low categorization (*n* = 147), whereas the moderate and high categorizations were smaller (*n* = 69 and 100, respectively). Thus, we divided patients into two groups, the low(w) and moderate/high(w) groups, by the winter-to-spring session IPAQ (thus “[w]” represents the winter session), and compared the plasma IL-6 levels between four diplotypes (Table[4](#tbl4)). The result was that IL-6 levels at rest were not significantly different between the eight groups (*P* = 0.193; Table[4](#tbl4)). We also analyzed the difference in the levels of hsCRP, BMI or other laboratory data in the eight groups, but found no significant difference (data not shown).

### Table 4.

| Physical activity | Diplotype | Plasma IL-6 levels at rest (ng/mL) | n |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Low(w) (n = 147) | C/C-G/G | 2.1 (1.3–3.2) | 67 |
| C/C-A/* | 1.9 (1.6–3.2) | 32 |  |
| G/*-G/G | 2.1 (1.6–3.6) | 29 |  |
| G/*-A/* | 2.0 (1.3–4.5) | 19 |  |
| Moderate/high(w) (n = 169) | C/C-G/G | 1.6 (1.1–2.8) | 81 |
| C/C-A/* | 2.1 (1.0–3.5) | 27 |  |
| G/*-G/G | 1.7 (1.1–2.6) | 28 |  |
| G/*-A/* | 1.7 (1.0–2.8) | 33 |  |

Table 4 Caption: Plasma interleukin-6 levels at rest in the winter-to-spring session, physical activity in that session, and the diplotypes of interleukin-6 single nucleotide polymorphisms

Next, we carried out a main multivariate analysis for all patients to evaluate the effect of the diplotype of the two SNPs on non-responder risk, using a logistic regression analysis with adjustment for sex, age, duration of being diagnosed with diabetes, BMI, physical activity, family history of diabetes, smoking, habitual drinking, hypertension, dyslipidemia, the HbA1c level at the start of DPP-4I treatments, classes of other antidiabetic medications and the change of antidiabetic medications at the start of DPP-4Is. The diplotype rs1800796 G/*–rs2097677 A/* had carried a marginal risk reduction for non-responders as compared with the C/C-G/G group (odds ratio 0.445, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.187–1.06, *P* = 0.068; Table[5](#tbl5)). Duration of diabetes and use of metformin were negatively associated with non-responder risk, whereas habitual drinking was a risk for being non-responders. Any change of the antidiabetic medications was included in the present study, and the switch from an oral hypoglycemic agent (OHA) was a strong risk factor for non-responders. Also, add-on of a DPP-4I to other medication(s) was a risk factor, except for the case with a dose-reduction of a SU[5](#b5).

### Table 5.

| Variables | Odds ratios for non-responders | P |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Diplotypes of SNPs |  |  |
| C/C-G/G | Referent |   |
| C/C-A/* | 0.682 (0.322–1.45) | 0.318 |
| G/*-G/G | 0.782 (0.361–1.69) | 0.532 |
| G/*-A/* | 0.445 (0.187–1.06) | 0.068 |
| Sex (men) | 0.720 (0.336–1.54) | 0.398 |
| Age (years) | 0.998 (0.969–1.03) | 0.892 |
| Duration of diabetes (years) | 0.956 (0.918–0.994) | 0.025 |
| BMI (kg/m2) | 1.06 (0.976–1.15) | 0.164 |
| Habitual drinking (yes) | 1.94 (1.01–3.73) | 0.048 |
| Smoking |  |  |
| Never | Referent |   |
| Ex | 0.941 (0.444–1.99) | 0.873 |
| Current | 0.568 (0.243–1.33) | 0.192 |
| Family history of diabetes | 1.20 (0.654–2.19) | 0.560 |
| Hypertension | 0.568 (0.308–1.049) | 0.071 |
| Dyslipidemia | 1.21 (0.64–2.25) | 0.559 |
| HbA1c levels at the start (%) | 0.758 (0.546–1.05) | 0.096 |
| METs (1,000 min/week) | 0.964 (0.891–1.04) | 0.356 |
| Other medications |  |  |
| Insulin | 1.60 (0.631–4.03) | 0.323 |
| Sulfonylurea | 1.66 (0.726–3.81) | 0.229 |
| Metformin | 0.310 (0.154–0.623) | <0.001 |
| α-Glucosidase inhibitors | 1.36 (0.711–2.60) | 0.353 |
| Thiazolidinedione | 0.889 (0.351–2.25) | 0.804 |
| Ways of the administration of DPP-4Is |  |  |
| First-time monotherapy | Referent |   |
| Switch from an oral hypoglycemic agent | 11.0 (3.08–39.1) | <0.001 |
| Add-on to other medication(s) | 3.93 (1.035–14.9) | 0.044 |
| Add-on with a dose-reduction of an SU | 2.58 (0.491–13.6) | 0.263 |
| Add-on with a dose-reduction of another medication (except SU) | 7.00 (1.41–34.6) | 0.017 |

Table 5 Caption: Binary logistic regression analysis to detect predictors for non-responders

Finally, we divided patients into two groups (the low group [*n* = 149] and the moderate [*n* = 87]/high [*n* = 80] group) by the IPAQ data corresponding to the season in which DPP-4 inhibitors had been administered (therefore the groups were different from those in Table[4](#tbl4)). Then we carried out similar logistic regression analysis for the two physical activity subgroups separately. It should be noted that the patients who had taken DPP-4Is as a first-time monotherapy were all responders in the low group, and the value of the term representing the change of antidiabetic medication at the start of DPP-4Is was modified to construct a valid and comparable regression model. That is, we combined the patients taking a first-time monotherapy of DPP-4Is and the patients taking an add-on therapy of DPP-4Is with a dose-reduction of a SU. This was based on the analysis for all patients in which the two categories had no significant difference in the risk for being non-responders (Table[5](#tbl5)). The result showed that the diplotype rs1800796 G/*–rs2097677 A/* had a lower risk for being non-responders than C/C-G/G in the moderate/high group (adjusted odds ratio 0.153, 95% CI 0.044–0.535, *P* = 0.003), but not in the low group (Table[6](#tbl6)). In the low group, duration of diabetes was negatively associated with the non-responder risk, whereas BMI and the switch from an OHA were positively associated with it. Also, use of insulin, SU and α-glucosidase inhibitors had a positive association with the non-responder risk, and current smoking had a negative association with it. In the moderate/high group, use of metformin was negatively associated with the non-responder risk, and switch from an OHA and add-on of a DPP-4I to other medication(s) were positively associated with it. Habitual drinking had a positive association with the non-responder risk in the moderate/high group.

### Table 6.

| Physical activity groups | Low (n = 149) |  | Moderate or high (n = 167) |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Variables | Odds ratio | P | Odds ratio | P |
| Diplotypes |  |  |  |  |
| C/C-G/G | Referent |   | Referent |   |
| C/C-A/* | 1.48 (0.436–5.00) | 0.531 | 0.411 (0.134–1.27) | 0.121 |
| G/*-G/G | 1.60 (0.416–6.14) | 0.494 | 0.726 (0.238–2.21) | 0.573 |
| G/*-A/* | 1.58 (0.265–9.44) | 0.615 | 0.153 (0.044–0.535) | 0.003 |
| Sex (men) | 1.31 (0.312–5.48) | 0.715 | 0.449 (0.150–1.34) | 0.151 |
| Age (years) | 0.975 (0.919–1.03) | 0.402 | 1.03 (0.983–1.07) | 0.242 |
| Duration of diabetes | 0.884 (0.813–0.960) | 0.003 | 0.980 (0.929–1.03) | 0.447 |
| BMI (kg/m2) | 1.23 (1.06–1.43) | 0.007 | 0.979 (0.862–1.11) | 0.739 |
| Habitual drinking (yes) | 1.23 (0.345–4.39) | 0.749 | 2.96 (1.09–8.06) | 0.033 |
| Smoking |  |  |  |  |
| Never | Referent |   | Referent |   |
| Ex | 0.352 (0.086–1.43) | 0.144 | 1.56 (0.515–4.70) | 0.433 |
| Current | 0.179 (0.032–0.984) | 0.048 | 0.451 (0.132–1.54) | 0.204 |
| Family history of diabetes | 0.730 (0.237–2.25) | 0.583 | 1.63 (0.672–3.97) | 0.279 |
| Hypertension | 0.334 (0.102–1.09) | 0.070 | 0.597 (0.250–1.42) | 0.244 |
| Dyslipidemia | 0.800 (0.261–2.45) | 0.696 | 1.424 (0.574–3.53) | 0.446 |
| HbA1c levels at the start (%) | 0.763 (0.442–1.32) | 0.331 | 0.876 (0.540–1.42) | 0.593 |
| METs (1,000 min/week) | 0.758 (0.304–1.90) | 0.554 | 0.938 (0.842–1.04) | 0.241 |
| Other medications |  |  |  |  |
| Insulin | 10.2 (1.64–63.6) | 0.013 | 0.868 (0.242–3.11) | 0.827 |
| Sulfonylurea | 6.42 (1.27–32.5) | 0.025 | 1.36 (0.495–3.73) | 0.553 |
| Metformin | 0.396 (0.119–1.31) | 0.130 | 0.247 (0.091–0.667) | 0.006 |
| α-Glucosidase inhibitor | 4.03 (1.08–15.1) | 0.039 | 0.801 (0.297–2.16) | 0.661 |
| Thiazolidinedione | 0.672 (0.113–3.99) | 0.662 | 1.92 (0.530–6.97) | 0.321 |
| Ways of the administration of DPP-4Is |  |  |  |  |
| First-time monotherapy or add-on with a dose-reduction of an SU† | Referent |   | Referent |   |
| Switch from an oral hypoglycemic agent | 33.6 (5.57–202) | <0.001 | 7.32 (1.87–28.6) | 0.004 |
| Add-on to other medication(s) | 0.610 (0.113–3.29) | 0.566 | 5.68 (1.63–19.7) | 0.006 |
| Add-on with a dose-reduction of another medication (except SU) | 2.76 (0.332–22.9) | 0.348 | 9.05 (1.42–57.6) | 0.020 |

Table 6 Caption: Binary logistic regression analysis to detect predictors for non-responders in the patients stratified by physical activity

## Discussion

The present study suggests that a combination of two SNPs in the IL-6 promoter region can reduce the risk of being a non-responder to DPP-4Is in Japanese patients, but this benefit requires a certain level of physical activity. In the report by Ellingsgaard *et al*.,[10](#b10) not only injection of a high dose of IL-6 that mimicked the acute increase in IL-6 produced by a long bout of vigorous exercise, but also a low dose of IL-6 that mimicked the mild chronic increase in IL-6 produced by a high-fat diet led to an increase in circulating GLP-1 in mice. That is the reason we first hypothesized that IL-6 SNPs might contribute to the enhancement of GLP-1 secretion from muscle as well as adipose tissue in response to IL-6. The present study result did not suggest the role of adiposity in the possible effect of the SNPs on the efficacy of DPP-4Is.

The role of circulating IL-6 in glucose metabolism is a debated subject. Plasma IL-6 is increased in obesity and type 2 diabetes, and a nested case–control study from a large-scale cohort showed that elevated IL-6 is a risk factor for the development of type 2 diabetes[30](#b30). However, studies in IL-6 knockout mice showed a role of IL-6 in the brain that counteracts obesity[31](#b31), and a recent study reported beneficial effects of IL-6 secreted from muscle on the improvement of glucose uptake and fat oxidation[32](#b32). Furthermore, macrophage-derived IL-6 has been implicated in the beneficial action of adiponectin on insulin sensitivity in the murine liver[33](#b33). Thus, various forms of cell-derived IL-6 reportedly play beneficial roles in glucose and fat metabolism.

The present study suggests, but does not show, a beneficial role of IL-6 in the efficacy of a class of medication for type 2 diabetes. The precise mechanism by which these SNPs reduce the likelihood of being a non-responder to DPP-4Is remains to be clarified. There is little information on the regulatory mechanism of these two SNPs in humans. An *in vitro* study suggested haplotype- and cell type-dependent transcriptional regulation of the IL-6 promoter region[28](#b28). Furthermore, a recent report suggested that very specific *in vivo* conditions are required to elucidate the roles of SNPs in the IL-6 promoter region[26](#b26), which highlights the important role of epigenetics under various environmental conditions. In fact, reports on the effects of the rs1800796 G allele have not been consistent to date[21](#b21)^–^[24](#b24). Thus, it is crucial to show differences in exercise-dependent increases in IL-6 or GLP-1 between different genotypes in humans, but this was beyond the scope of the present study. Further investigation is required for direct evidence on this issue.

Another limitation in the present study was that we could not rule out the possibility that DPP-4Is affect IL-6 production in several tissues. DPP-4 is an enzyme that degrades a lot of substrates, and recently a reduced production of IL-6 in monocytes as a result of DPP-4 inhibition has been reported[34](#b34). Although the effects of DPP-4Is on IL-6 synthesis in or secretion by muscle are not known, the DPP-4 expression level in muscle is low[35](#b35), and we speculate that DPP-4Is are unlikely to exert a substantial effect on muscle-derived IL-6. However, a recent study showed that DPP-4 is secreted from adipose tissue, and that it is a biomarker for metabolic syndrome[36](#b36). We have no information as to whether or not the secretion of DPP-4 in this tissue contributes to the regulation of IL-6 secretion in adipose tissue. Furthermore, muscle cells from patients with type 2 diabetes have a defective response to IL-6[37](#b37), suggesting that resistance to IL-6 might exist in some tissues of patients with type 2 diabetes. Further investigation is warranted to show the link between circulating IL-6 and GLP-1 secretion specifically in patients with type 2 diabetes under the administration of DPP-4Is.

Covariates for affecting the non-responder risk were identified in the main and subgroup analyses, although our primary outcome is the association between IL-6 SNPs and the non-responder risk, and those covariates are not the primary outcome in the present study. We as yet have no plausible explanations except for the beneficial effect of metformin[38](#b38). In the present study, use of α-glucosidase inhibitors was a risk factor for being a non-responder only in the low physical activity group, but miglitol was reported to enhance GLP-1 secretion[39](#b39). Use of insulin and SU were also risk factors only in the low group, and we speculate that patients using these medications might have had a lower insulin secretory capacity. Doses and classes of antidiabetic medications were not controlled in the present study, and we cannot clarify the effects of the add-on therapy. Also, the longer the duration of since being diagnosed with diabetes the lower the risk for being a non-responder tended to be, and this is also inconsistent with the results described in a preceding report[5](#b5). Here, we cannot exclude information bias on the duration of diabetes. Drinking might be associated with a higher caloric intake, and is likely to increase the non-responder risk. BMI was a risk factor only in the low group, which might be the result of obesity- and lower physical activity-associated insulin resistance. Also, current smoking, which is known to enhance energy expenditure, seemed to have an association in the low group.

The present study had limitations other than those already described. First, we observed the effect of the SNPs on the non-responder risk only in the subgroup analysis, not in the main analysis. Herein, the problem of multiple testing might exist. Second, this was an observational study in which many DPP-4Is were included and other medications or dietary factors were not controlled. Thus, some confounding factors are likely to have been overlooked. Third, no physical activity questionnaire was carried out during the observational period, and inconsistencies might exist between the estimations and the actual activities. Fourth, the limited sample size could have resulted in underestimation of the effects of the SNPs or other covariates. Fifth, 16 patients were excluded because of the lack of matched IPAQ data, and this might cause selection bias. Finally, we cannot exclude the possibility that another genetic locus that might be closely linked to the SNPs analyzed herein is responsible for the responsiveness to DPP-4Is.

In conclusion, the present results suggest that Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes might have a lower risk of being non-responders to DPP-4Is if they have a combination of the rs1800796 G allele and the rs2097677 A allele, and at the same time a certain level of physical activity. However, larger, controlled, prospective studies are required to confirm this.

## Acknowledgments

This work received no specific funding. The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Supporting Information

**Appendix S1** | Summary of the haplotype estimation of the two single nucleotide polymorphisms.

**Appendix S1** | Summary of the haplotype estimation of the two single nucleotide polymorphisms.

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Supplementary Materials

**Appendix S1** | Summary of the haplotype estimation of the two single nucleotide polymorphisms.

### Supplementary Materials

**Appendix S1** | Summary of the haplotype estimation of the two single nucleotide polymorphisms.

**Appendix S1** | Summary of the haplotype estimation of the two single nucleotide polymorphisms.

## References

1. Campbell JE, Drucker DJ. Pharmacology, physiology, and mechanisms of incretin hormone action. Cell Metab. 2013;17:819–837. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2013.04.008.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2013.04.008) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23684623/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Metab&title=Pharmacology,%20physiology,%20and%20mechanisms%20of%20incretin%20hormone%20action&author=JE%20Campbell&author=DJ%20Drucker&volume=17&publication_year=2013&pages=819-837&pmid=23684623&doi=10.1016/j.cmet.2013.04.008&)

2. Kim YG, Hahn S, Oh TJ, et al. Differences in the glucose-lowering efficacy of dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors between Asians and non-Asians: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetologia. 2013;56:696–708. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2827-3.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-012-2827-3) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23344728/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetologia&title=Differences%20in%20the%20glucose-lowering%20efficacy%20of%20dipeptidyl%20peptidase-4%20inhibitors%20between%20Asians%20and%20non-Asians:%20a%20systematic%20review%20and%20meta-analysis&author=YG%20Kim&author=S%20Hahn&author=TJ%20Oh&volume=56&publication_year=2013&pages=696-708&pmid=23344728&doi=10.1007/s00125-012-2827-3&)

3. Kim SA, Shim WH, Lee EH, et al. Predictive clinical parameters for the therapeutic efficacy of sitagliptin in Korean type 2 diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Metab J. 2011;35:159–165. doi: 10.4093/dmj.2011.35.2.159.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.4093/dmj.2011.35.2.159) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3122893/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21738898/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes%20Metab%20J&title=Predictive%20clinical%20parameters%20for%20the%20therapeutic%20efficacy%20of%20sitagliptin%20in%20Korean%20type%202%20diabetes%20mellitus&author=SA%20Kim&author=WH%20Shim&author=EH%20Lee&volume=35&publication_year=2011&pages=159-165&pmid=21738898&doi=10.4093/dmj.2011.35.2.159&)

4. Tajiri Y, Tsuruta M, Ohki T, et al. Long-term efficacy of sitagliptin for the treatment of type 2 diabetic patients in Japan. Endocrine J. 2012;59:197–204. doi: 10.1507/endocrj.ej11-0248.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1507/endocrj.ej11-0248) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22156327/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Endocrine%20J&title=Long-term%20efficacy%20of%20sitagliptin%20for%20the%20treatment%20of%20type%202%20diabetic%20patients%20in%20Japan&author=Y%20Tajiri&author=M%20Tsuruta&author=T%20Ohki&volume=59&publication_year=2012&pages=197-204&pmid=22156327&doi=10.1507/endocrj.ej11-0248&)

5. Harashima SI, Ogura M, Tanaka D, et al. Sitagliptin add-on to low dosage sulphonylureas: efficacy and safety of combination therapy on glycaemic control and insulin secretion capacity in type 2 diabetes. Int J Clin Pract. 2012;66:465–476. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-1241.2012.02903.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-1241.2012.02903.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22512606/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int%20J%20Clin%20Pract&title=Sitagliptin%20add-on%20to%20low%20dosage%20sulphonylureas:%20efficacy%20and%20safety%20of%20combination%20therapy%20on%20glycaemic%20control%20and%20insulin%20secretion%20capacity%20in%20type%202%20diabetes&author=SI%20Harashima&author=M%20Ogura&author=D%20Tanaka&volume=66&publication_year=2012&pages=465-476&pmid=22512606&doi=10.1111/j.1742-1241.2012.02903.x&)

6. Iwasaki M, Hoshian F, Tsuji T, et al. Predicting efficacy of dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors in patients with type 2 diabetes: association of glycated hemoglobin reduction with serum eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic acid levels. J Diabetes Invest. 2012;3:464–467. doi: 10.1111/j.2040-1124.2012.00214.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2040-1124.2012.00214.x) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4019247/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24843607/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Diabetes%20Invest&title=Predicting%20efficacy%20of%20dipeptidyl%20peptidase-4%20inhibitors%20in%20patients%20with%20type%202%20diabetes:%20association%20of%20glycated%20hemoglobin%20reduction%20with%20serum%20eicosapentaenoic%20acid%20and%20docosahexaenoic%20acid%20levels&author=M%20Iwasaki&author=F%20Hoshian&author=T%20Tsuji&volume=3&publication_year=2012&pages=464-467&pmid=24843607&doi=10.1111/j.2040-1124.2012.00214.x&)

7. Nomiyama T, Akehi Y, Takenoshita H, et al. Contributing factors related to efficacy of the dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor sitagliptin in Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2012;95:e27–e28. doi: 10.1016/j.diabres.2011.08.016.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diabres.2011.08.016) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21899912/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes%20Res%20Clin%20Pract&title=Contributing%20factors%20related%20to%20efficacy%20of%20the%20dipeptidyl%20peptidase-4%20inhibitor%20sitagliptin%20in%20Japanese%20patients%20with%20type%202%20diabetes&author=T%20Nomiyama&author=Y%20Akehi&author=H%20Takenoshita&volume=95&publication_year=2012&pages=e27-e28&pmid=21899912&doi=10.1016/j.diabres.2011.08.016&)

8. Maeda H, Kubota A, Tanaka Y, et al. ASSET-K Study Group. The safety, efficacy, and predictors for HbA1c reduction of sitagliptin in the treatment of Japanese type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2012;95:e20–e22. doi: 10.1016/j.diabres.2011.10.011.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diabres.2011.10.011) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22055835/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes%20Res%20Clin%20Pract&title=ASSET-K%20Study%20Group.%20The%20safety,%20efficacy,%20and%20predictors%20for%20HbA1c%20reduction%20of%20sitagliptin%20in%20the%20treatment%20of%20Japanese%20type%202%20diabetes&author=H%20Maeda&author=A%20Kubota&author=Y%20Tanaka&volume=95&publication_year=2012&pages=e20-e22&pmid=22055835&doi=10.1016/j.diabres.2011.10.011&)

9. Chung HS, Suh S, Kim MY, et al. Predictive factors of durability to sitagliptin: slower reduction of glycated hemoglobin, older age and higher baseline glycated hemoglobin. J Diab Invest. 2014;5:51–59. doi: 10.1111/jdi.12127.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdi.12127) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4025229/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24843737/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Diab%20Invest&title=Predictive%20factors%20of%20durability%20to%20sitagliptin:%20slower%20reduction%20of%20glycated%20hemoglobin,%20older%20age%20and%20higher%20baseline%20glycated%20hemoglobin&author=HS%20Chung&author=S%20Suh&author=MY%20Kim&volume=5&publication_year=2014&pages=51-59&pmid=24843737&doi=10.1111/jdi.12127&)

10. Ellingsgaard H, Hauselmann I, Schuler B, et al. Interleukin-6 enhances insulin secretion by increasing glucagon-like peptide-1 secretion from L cells and alpha cells. Nature Med. 2011;17:1481–1489. doi: 10.1038/nm.2513.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.2513) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4286294/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22037645/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature%20Med&title=Interleukin-6%20enhances%20insulin%20secretion%20by%20increasing%20glucagon-like%20peptide-1%20secretion%20from%20L%20cells%20and%20alpha%20cells&author=H%20Ellingsgaard&author=I%20Hauselmann&author=B%20Schuler&volume=17&publication_year=2011&pages=1481-1489&pmid=22037645&doi=10.1038/nm.2513&)

11. Dela F, von Linstow ME, Mikines KJ, et al. Physical training may enhance ß-cell function in type 2 diabetes. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2004;287:E1024–E1031. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00056.2004.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpendo.00056.2004) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15251867/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Physiol%20Endocrinol%20Metab&title=Physical%20training%20may%20enhance%20%C3%9F-cell%20function%20in%20type%202%20diabetes&author=F%20Dela&author=ME%20von%20Linstow&author=KJ%20Mikines&volume=287&publication_year=2004&pages=E1024-E1031&pmid=15251867&doi=10.1152/ajpendo.00056.2004&)

12. Ueda S, Yoshikawa T, Katsura Y, et al. Changes in gut hormone levels and negative energy balance during aerobic exercise in obese young males. J Endocrinol. 2009;201:151–159. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0500.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1677/JOE-08-0500) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19158129/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Endocrinol&title=Changes%20in%20gut%20hormone%20levels%20and%20negative%20energy%20balance%20during%20aerobic%20exercise%20in%20obese%20young%20males&author=S%20Ueda&author=T%20Yoshikawa&author=Y%20Katsura&volume=201&publication_year=2009&pages=151-159&pmid=19158129&doi=10.1677/JOE-08-0500&)

13. Committee on the Standardization of Diabetes Mellitus-Related Laboratory Testing of Japan Diabetes Society. International clinical harmonization of glycated hemoglobin in Japan: from Japan Diabetes Society to National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program values. J Diabetes Invest. 2012;3:39–40. doi: 10.1111/j.2040-1124.2012.00207.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2040-1124.2012.00207.x) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4014931/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24843544/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Diabetes%20Invest&title=International%20clinical%20harmonization%20of%20glycated%20hemoglobin%20in%20Japan:%20from%20Japan%20Diabetes%20Society%20to%20National%20Glycohemoglobin%20Standardization%20Program%20values&volume=3&publication_year=2012&pages=39-40&pmid=24843544&doi=10.1111/j.2040-1124.2012.00207.x&)

14. Murase N, Katsumura T, Ueda C, et al. Validity and reliability of Japanese version of International Physical Activity Questionnaire. J Health Welf Stat. 2002;49:1–9. (Japanese)  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Health%20Welf%20Stat&title=Validity%20and%20reliability%20of%20Japanese%20version%20of%20International%20Physical%20Activity%20Questionnaire&author=N%20Murase&author=T%20Katsumura&author=C%20Ueda&volume=49&publication_year=2002&pages=1-9&)

15. Craig CL, Marshall AL, Sjöström M, et al. International physical activity questionnaire: 12-country reliability and validity. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2003;35:1381–1395. doi: 10.1249/01.MSS.0000078924.61453.FB.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1249/01.MSS.0000078924.61453.FB) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12900694/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Med%20Sci%20Sports%20Exerc&title=International%20physical%20activity%20questionnaire:%2012-country%20reliability%20and%20validity&author=CL%20Craig&author=AL%20Marshall&author=M%20Sj%C3%B6str%C3%B6m&volume=35&publication_year=2003&pages=1381-1395&pmid=12900694&doi=10.1249/01.MSS.0000078924.61453.FB&)

16. Laval ELG, Schneider S. Arlequin ver. 3.0: an integrated software package for population genetics data analysis. Evol Bioinform Online. 2005;1:47–50.  [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2658868/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19325852/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Evol%20Bioinform%20Online&title=Arlequin%20ver.%203.0:%20an%20integrated%20software%20package%20for%20population%20genetics%20data%20analysis&author=ELG%20Laval&author=S%20Schneider&volume=1&publication_year=2005&pages=47-50&pmid=19325852&)

17. Fröhlich M, Imhof A, Berg G, et al. Association between C-reactive protein and features of the metabolic syndrome: a population-based study. Diabetes Care. 2000;23:1835–1839. doi: 10.2337/diacare.23.12.1835.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/diacare.23.12.1835) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11128362/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes%20Care&title=Association%20between%20C-reactive%20protein%20and%20features%20of%20the%20metabolic%20syndrome:%20a%20population-based%20study&author=M%20Fr%C3%B6hlich&author=A%20Imhof&author=G%20Berg&volume=23&publication_year=2000&pages=1835-1839&pmid=11128362&doi=10.2337/diacare.23.12.1835&)

18. Fischer CP, Berntsen A, Perstrup LB, et al. Plasma levels of interleukin-6 and C-reactive protein are associated with physical inactivity independent of obesity. Scand J Med Sci Sports. 2007;17:580–587. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0838.2006.00602.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0838.2006.00602.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17076827/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Scand%20J%20Med%20Sci%20Sports&title=Plasma%20levels%20of%20interleukin-6%20and%20C-reactive%20protein%20are%20associated%20with%20physical%20inactivity%20independent%20of%20obesity&author=CP%20Fischer&author=A%20Berntsen&author=LB%20Perstrup&volume=17&publication_year=2007&pages=580-587&pmid=17076827&doi=10.1111/j.1600-0838.2006.00602.x&)

19. Woo P, Humphries SE. IL-6 polymorphisms: a useful genetic tool for inflammation research? J Clin Invest. 2013;123:1413–1414. doi: 10.1172/JCI67221.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI67221) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3613933/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23543063/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Invest&title=IL-6%20polymorphisms:%20a%20useful%20genetic%20tool%20for%20inflammation%20research?&author=P%20Woo&author=SE%20Humphries&volume=123&publication_year=2013&pages=1413-1414&pmid=23543063&doi=10.1172/JCI67221&)

20. Ognjanovic S, Yamamoto J, Saltzman B, et al. Serum CRP and IL-6, genetic variants and risk of colorectal adenoma in a multiethnic population. Cancer Causes Control. 2010;21:1131–1138. doi: 10.1007/s10552-010-9540-7.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10552-010-9540-7) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20333461/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Causes%20Control&title=Serum%20CRP%20and%20IL-6,%20genetic%20variants%20and%20risk%20of%20colorectal%20adenoma%20in%20a%20multiethnic%20population&author=S%20Ognjanovic&author=J%20Yamamoto&author=B%20Saltzman&volume=21&publication_year=2010&pages=1131-1138&pmid=20333461&doi=10.1007/s10552-010-9540-7&)

21. Pan M, Gao SP, Jiang MH, et al. Interleukin 6 promoter polymorphisms in normal Han Chinese population: frequencies and effects on inflammatory markers. J Investig Med. 2011;59:272–276. doi: 10.231/JIM.0b013e318206ffad.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.231/JIM.0b013e318206ffad) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21157373/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Investig%20Med&title=Interleukin%206%20promoter%20polymorphisms%20in%20normal%20Han%20Chinese%20population:%20frequencies%20and%20effects%20on%20inflammatory%20markers&author=M%20Pan&author=SP%20Gao&author=MH%20Jiang&volume=59&publication_year=2011&pages=272-276&pmid=21157373&doi=10.231/JIM.0b013e318206ffad&)

22. Kitamura A, Hasegawa G, Obayashi H, et al. Interleukin-6 polymorphism (–634C/G) in the promoter region and the progression of diabetic nephropathy in Type 2 diabetes. Diabetic Med. 2002;19:1000–1005. doi: 10.1046/j.1464-5491.2002.00844.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1464-5491.2002.00844.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12647840/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetic%20Med&title=Interleukin-6%20polymorphism%20(%E2%80%93634C/G)%20in%20the%20promoter%20region%20and%20the%20progression%20of%20diabetic%20nephropathy%20in%20Type%202%20diabetes&author=A%20Kitamura&author=G%20Hasegawa&author=H%20Obayashi&volume=19&publication_year=2002&pages=1000-1005&pmid=12647840&doi=10.1046/j.1464-5491.2002.00844.x&)

23. Zhang X, Ma L, Peng F, et al. The endothelial dysfunction in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus is associated with IL-6 gene promoter polymorphism in Chinese population. Endocrine. 2011;40:124–129. doi: 10.1007/s12020-011-9442-9.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12020-011-9442-9) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21424184/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Endocrine&title=The%20endothelial%20dysfunction%20in%20patients%20with%20type%202%20diabetes%20mellitus%20is%20associated%20with%20IL-6%20gene%20promoter%20polymorphism%20in%20Chinese%20population&author=X%20Zhang&author=L%20Ma&author=F%20Peng&volume=40&publication_year=2011&pages=124-129&pmid=21424184&doi=10.1007/s12020-011-9442-9&)

24. Cheung BM, Ong KL, Tso AW, et al. Relationship of plasma interleukin-6 and its genetic variants with hypertension in Hong Kong Chinese. Am J Hypertens. 2011;24:1331–1337. doi: 10.1038/ajh.2011.141.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ajh.2011.141) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21833041/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Hypertens&title=Relationship%20of%20plasma%20interleukin-6%20and%20its%20genetic%20variants%20with%20hypertension%20in%20Hong%20Kong%20Chinese&author=BM%20Cheung&author=KL%20Ong&author=AW%20Tso&volume=24&publication_year=2011&pages=1331-1337&pmid=21833041&doi=10.1038/ajh.2011.141&)

25. Okada Y, Takahashi A, Ohmiya H, et al. Genome-wide association study for C-reactive protein levels identified pleiotropic associations in the IL6 locus. Hum Mol Genet. 2011;20:1224–1231. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq551.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddq551) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21196492/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hum%20Mol%20Genet&title=Genome-wide%20association%20study%20for%20C-reactive%20protein%20levels%20identified%20pleiotropic%20associations%20in%20the%20IL6%20locus&author=Y%20Okada&author=A%20Takahashi&author=H%20Ohmiya&volume=20&publication_year=2011&pages=1224-1231&pmid=21196492&doi=10.1093/hmg/ddq551&)

26. Smith AJ, Zheng D, Palmen J, et al. Effects of genetic variation on chromatin structure and the transcriptional machinery: analysis of the IL6 gene locus. Genes Immun. 2012;13:583–586. doi: 10.1038/gene.2012.32.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/gene.2012.32) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22895491/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genes%20Immun&title=Effects%20of%20genetic%20variation%20on%20chromatin%20structure%20and%20the%20transcriptional%20machinery:%20analysis%20of%20the%20IL6%20gene%20locus&author=AJ%20Smith&author=D%20Zheng&author=J%20Palmen&volume=13&publication_year=2012&pages=583-586&pmid=22895491&doi=10.1038/gene.2012.32&)

27. Hara K, Horikoshi M, Kitazato H, et al. Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 P2 promoter haplotypes are associated with type 2 diabetes in the Japanese population. Diabetes. 2006;55:1260–1264. doi: 10.2337/db05-0620.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/db05-0620) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16644680/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes&title=Hepatocyte%20nuclear%20factor-4%20P2%20promoter%20haplotypes%20are%20associated%20with%20type%202%20diabetes%20in%20the%20Japanese%20population&author=K%20Hara&author=M%20Horikoshi&author=H%20Kitazato&volume=55&publication_year=2006&pages=1260-1264&pmid=16644680&doi=10.2337/db05-0620&)

28. Terry CF, Loukaci V, Green FR. Cooperative influence of genetic polymorphisms on interleukin 6 transcriptional regulation. J Biol Chem. 2000;275:18138–18144. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M000379200.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M000379200) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10747905/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Biol%20Chem&title=Cooperative%20influence%20of%20genetic%20polymorphisms%20on%20interleukin%206%20transcriptional%20regulation&author=CF%20Terry&author=V%20Loukaci&author=FR%20Green&volume=275&publication_year=2000&pages=18138-18144&pmid=10747905&doi=10.1074/jbc.M000379200&)

29. Fischer CP. Interleukin-6 in acute exercise and training: what is the biological relevance? Exerc Immunol Rev. 2006;12:6–33.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17201070/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Exerc%20Immunol%20Rev&title=Interleukin-6%20in%20acute%20exercise%20and%20training:%20what%20is%20the%20biological%20relevance?&author=CP%20Fischer&volume=12&publication_year=2006&pages=6-33&pmid=17201070&)

30. Spranger J, Kroke A, Möhlig M, et al. Inflammatory cytokines and the risk to develop type 2 diabetes: results of the prospective population-based European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)-Potsdam Study. Diabetes. 2003;52:812–817. doi: 10.2337/diabetes.52.3.812.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/diabetes.52.3.812) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12606524/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes&title=Inflammatory%20cytokines%20and%20the%20risk%20to%20develop%20type%202%20diabetes:%20results%20of%20the%20prospective%20population-based%20European%20Prospective%20Investigation%20into%20Cancer%20and%20Nutrition%20(EPIC)-Potsdam%20Study&author=J%20Spranger&author=A%20Kroke&author=M%20M%C3%B6hlig&volume=52&publication_year=2003&pages=812-817&pmid=12606524&doi=10.2337/diabetes.52.3.812&)

31. Wallenius V, Wallenius K, Ahrén B, et al. Interleukin-6-deficient mice develop mature-onset obesity. Nat Med. 2002;8:75–79. doi: 10.1038/nm0102-75.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm0102-75) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11786910/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Med&title=Interleukin-6-deficient%20mice%20develop%20mature-onset%20obesity&author=V%20Wallenius&author=K%20Wallenius&author=B%20Ahr%C3%A9n&volume=8&publication_year=2002&pages=75-79&pmid=11786910&doi=10.1038/nm0102-75&)

32. Carey AL, Steinberg GR, Macaulay SL, et al. Interleukin-6 increases insulin-stimulated glucose disposal in humans and glucose uptake and fatty acid oxidation in vitro via AMP-activated protein kinase. Diabetes. 2006;55:2688–2697. doi: 10.2337/db05-1404.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/db05-1404) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17003332/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes&title=Interleukin-6%20increases%20insulin-stimulated%20glucose%20disposal%20in%20humans%20and%20glucose%20uptake%20and%20fatty%20acid%20oxidation%20in%20vitro%20via%20AMP-activated%20protein%20kinase&author=AL%20Carey&author=GR%20Steinberg&author=SL%20Macaulay&volume=55&publication_year=2006&pages=2688-2697&pmid=17003332&doi=10.2337/db05-1404&)

33. Awazawa M, Ueki K, Inabe K, et al. Adiponectin enhances insulin sensitivity by increasing hepatic IRS-2 expression via a macrophage-derived IL-6-dependent pathway. Cell Metab. 2011;13:401–412. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2011.02.010.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2011.02.010) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21459325/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Metab&title=Adiponectin%20enhances%20insulin%20sensitivity%20by%20increasing%20hepatic%20IRS-2%20expression%20via%20a%20macrophage-derived%20IL-6-dependent%20pathway&author=M%20Awazawa&author=K%20Ueki&author=K%20Inabe&volume=13&publication_year=2011&pages=401-412&pmid=21459325&doi=10.1016/j.cmet.2011.02.010&)

34. Lee SA, Kim YR, Yang EJ, et al. CD26/DPP4 levels in peripheral blood and T cells in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013;98:2553–2561. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-4288.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2012-4288) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23539735/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Endocrinol%20Metab&title=CD26/DPP4%20levels%20in%20peripheral%20blood%20and%20T%20cells%20in%20patients%20with%20type%202%20diabetes%20mellitus&author=SA%20Lee&author=YR%20Kim&author=EJ%20Yang&volume=98&publication_year=2013&pages=2553-2561&pmid=23539735&doi=10.1210/jc.2012-4288&)

35. Abbott CA, Baker E, Sutherland GR, et al. Genomic organization, exact localization, and tissue expression of the human CD26 (dipeptidyl peptidase IV) gene. Immunogenetics. 1994;40:331–338. doi: 10.1007/BF01246674.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01246674) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7927537/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Immunogenetics&title=Genomic%20organization,%20exact%20localization,%20and%20tissue%20expression%20of%20the%20human%20CD26%20(dipeptidyl%20peptidase%20IV)%20gene&author=CA%20Abbott&author=E%20Baker&author=GR%20Sutherland&volume=40&publication_year=1994&pages=331-338&pmid=7927537&doi=10.1007/BF01246674&)

36. Lamers D, Famulla S, Wronkowitz N, et al. Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 is a novel adipokine potentially linking obesity to the metabolic syndrome. Diabetes. 2011;60:1917–1925. doi: 10.2337/db10-1707.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/db10-1707) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3121429/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21593202/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes&title=Dipeptidyl%20peptidase%204%20is%20a%20novel%20adipokine%20potentially%20linking%20obesity%20to%20the%20metabolic%20syndrome&author=D%20Lamers&author=S%20Famulla&author=N%20Wronkowitz&volume=60&publication_year=2011&pages=1917-1925&pmid=21593202&doi=10.2337/db10-1707&)

37. Jiang LQ, Duque-Guimaraes DE, Machado UF, et al. Altered response of skeletal muscle to IL-6 in type 2 diabetic patients. Diabetes. 2013;62:355–361. doi: 10.2337/db11-1790.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/db11-1790) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3554367/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23086036/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes&title=Altered%20response%20of%20skeletal%20muscle%20to%20IL-6%20in%20type%202%20diabetic%20patients&author=LQ%20Jiang&author=DE%20Duque-Guimaraes&author=UF%20Machado&volume=62&publication_year=2013&pages=355-361&pmid=23086036&doi=10.2337/db11-1790&)

38. Maida A, Lamont BJ, Cao X, et al. Metformin regulates the incretin receptor axis via a pathway dependent on peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-α in mice. Diabetologia. 2011;54:339–349. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1937-z.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-010-1937-z) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20972533/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetologia&title=Metformin%20regulates%20the%20incretin%20receptor%20axis%20via%20a%20pathway%20dependent%20on%20peroxisome%20proliferator-activated%20receptor-%CE%B1%20in%20mice&author=A%20Maida&author=BJ%20Lamont&author=X%20Cao&volume=54&publication_year=2011&pages=339-349&pmid=20972533&doi=10.1007/s00125-010-1937-z&)

39. Aoki K, Kamiyama H, Yoshimura K, et al. Miglitol administered before breakfast increased plasma active glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) levels after lunch in patients with type 2 diabetes treated with sitagliptin. Acta Diabetol. 2012;49:225–230. doi: 10.1007/s00592-011-0322-9.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00592-011-0322-9) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21898126/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Acta%20Diabetol&title=Miglitol%20administered%20before%20breakfast%20increased%20plasma%20active%20glucagon-like%20peptide-1%20(GLP-1)%20levels%20after%20lunch%20in%20patients%20with%20type%202%20diabetes%20treated%20with%20sitagliptin&author=K%20Aoki&author=H%20Kamiyama&author=K%20Yoshimura&volume=49&publication_year=2012&pages=225-230&pmid=21898126&doi=10.1007/s00592-011-0322-9&)
