# Common Variants in ACYP2 Influence Susceptibility to Cisplatin-induced Hearing Loss

## Metadata
**Authors:** Heng Xu, Giles W Robinson, Jie Huang, Joshua Yew-Suang Lim, Hui Zhang, Johnnie K Bass, Alberto Broniscer, Murali Chintagumpala, Ute Bartels, Sri Gururangan, Tim Hassall, Michael Fisher, Richard Cohn, Tetsuji Yamashita, Tal Teitz, Jian Zuo, Arzu Onar-Thomas, Amar Gajjar, Clinton F Stewart, Jun J Yang
**Journal:** Nature genetics
**Date:** 2015 Feb 9
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.3217](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3217)
**PMID:** 25665007
**PMCID:** PMC4358157
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4358157/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4358157/pdf/nihms669216.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4358157/pdf/nihms669216.pdf)

## Abstract

Taking a genome-wide association study approach, we identified inherited genetic variations in ACYP2 associated with cisplatin ototoxicity (rs1872328, P = 3.9×10-8, hazard ratio = 4.5) in 238 children with newly-diagnosed brain tumors, with independent replication in 68 similarly treated children. ACYP2 risk variant strongly predisposed patients to precipitous hearing loss and was related to ototoxicity severity. These results point to novel biology of ototoxic effects of platinum agents.

## Online Methods

### Patients and treatment

A total of 238 children with newly-diagnosed brain tumors enrolled in the St. Jude SJMB96 (ClinicalTrials.gov: [NCT00003211](https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00003211), 1996-2003) and SJMB03 ([NCT00085202](https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00085202), 2003-2012) protocols were included in the discovery GWAS, based on the availability of germline DNA and audiology assessments ([Supplementary Figure 2](#SD1)). Patients with no cisplatin dose information (N = 3) and/or with hearing loss at baseline (N = 16) or before cisplatin treatment (N = 1) were excluded. Tumor diagnosis included medulloblastoma (N = 203), atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor (N = 13), pineoblastoma (N = 14), and primitive neuroectodermall tumor (N = 8), ([Supplementary Table 4](#SD1)). Comparing study participants (included in the genetic analyses) with non-participants (treated on the clinical treatment protocols but not included in genetic analyses), we did not observe any significant differences in demographic or clinical features (data not shown).

As described previously^30^, SJMB96 was a frontline treatment protocol for newly-diagnosed brain tumors with risk-adapted radiation and chemotherapy. Thus, patients with high-risk (metastatic and/or incompletely resected) medulloblastoma underwent craniospinal radiotherapy (M0–1, 36Gy; M2–3, 39.6Gy) with a three-dimensional conformal boost to the tumor bed (total dose: 55.8Gy) and, wherever appropriate, to local sites of metastasis (total dose: 50.4Gy). Those with average-risk disease (M0 and gross totally resected/near totally resected) received 23.4Gy craniospinal radiotherapy, with boost to the tumor bed (total dose: 55.8Gy). After a 6-week rest, all patients began four cycles of high-dose chemotherapy including cisplatin (75 mg/m^2^ per cycle). The SJMB03 protocol utilized treatment regimens nearly identical to those of the SJMB96 protocol, except that (i) clinical target volume margin for primary site irradiation was 1cm for SJMB03 and 2cm for SJMB96 and (ii) all patients were offered amifostine as a prophylaxis for ototoxicity on SJMB03, whereas patients on the SJMB96 protocol did not have the option to receive amifostine until 2000^12^ ([Supplementary Figure 1](#SD1)).

The replication cohort consisted of 68 young children with newly-diagnosed brain tumor treated on the SJYC07 protocol (ClinicalTrials.gov: [NCT00602667](https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00602667), [Supplementary Table 3](#SD1)). In this protocol patients were mostly younger than 3 years of age at diagnosis. Therapy was risk-adapted into three treatment arms based on diagnosis and clinical risk factors: a low risk arm that consisted of chemotherapy only, an intermediate risk arm that included focal radiation therapy after initial chemotherapy, and a high risk arm that consisted of chemotherapy only. Upfront craniospinal irradiation was avoided in the SJYC07 population, and cranial radiation, when administered, was limited to a defined margin around the tumor bed and given after chemotherapy. Although inclusive of a multitude of diagnoses (medulloblastoma, supratentorial primitive neuroectodermal tumor, atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor, high grade glioma, choroid plexus carcinoma, or ependymoma) and risk-adapted treatment regimens, all participants received identical induction chemotherapy regimens which only varied by the addition of vinblastine to the high risk population. This induction regimen consisted of 4 cycles of therapy including cisplatin (75 mg/m^2^ per cycle), followed by consolidation therapy whereby low risk patients received additional 2 cycles of chemotherapy which includes carboplatin, intermediate risk patient received focal radiation therapy (54Gy) to the tumoral bed, and high risk patients received additional non-platinum based chemotherapy.

This study was approved by the St. Jude Children's Research Hospital institutional review board, and informed consent was obtained from all patients, parents, or legal guardians as appropriate.

### Hearing evaluation and ototoxicity

For all patients enrolled on SJMB96, SJMB03, and SJYC07, ototoxicity was prospectively and regularly monitored per treatment protocols in a consistent fashion. Audiological evaluation for SJMB96 and SJMB03 was performed at enrollment (month 0), after radiotherapy (month 3), after each cycle of chemotherapy (month 4, 5, 6, 7), every 2-3 months until 1 year from enrollment (month 9 and month 12) and thereafter annually (month 24, 36, and so on). Audiological evaluation for SJYC07 was performed at enrollment (month 0), prior to the third cycle of chemotherapy (month 2-3), after the fourth cycle of chemotherapy and prior to consolidation (month 5), after consolidation therapy (month 7), at end of therapy (12 months) and thereafter annually (month 24, 36, and so on). Age- and developmentally- appropriate audiometric testing was performed (e.g., conventional audiometry, conditioned play, visual reinforcement audiometry, or auditory brain stem response), and thresholds were measured at 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 8 kHz. Audiograms were evaluated using the Chang criteria^31^.

Ototoxicity status was defined following our previously published procedures with slight modifications^18^. For children on the SJMB96 and SJMB03 protocols, cisplatin-related hearing loss assessment was based on audiology data between 9 and 24 months from therapy initiation, and the audiology examination closest to 24 months and the worse grade of two ears were used to determine ototoxicity. For children on SJYC07 protocol in which cisplatin was administered over 4 months immediately after diagnosis, ototoxicity status was thus defined by the last audiology examination prior to 24 months. All ototoxicity grades were reviewed longitudinally to rule out temporary hearing loss (e.g., otitis). Time to ototoxicity was defined as the lapse between cisplatin therapy initiation and the time when a non-zero Chang grade was first recorded. Patients with Chang grade > 0 were classified as positive for ototoxicity, and events with Chang grade ≥ 2a were considered as clinically relevant (when applicable).

### Genotyping and quality control

Genotyping was performed by using the Illumina HumanOmni2.5+HumanExome BeadChip (Illumina). Genotype calls (coded as 0, 1, and 2 for AA, AB, and BB genotypes) were determined using the GenomeStudio Software from Illumina. Samples for which genotype was ascertained at < 98% of SNPs on the array were deemed to have failed and were excluded from the analyses. SNP quality control procedures were performed on the basis of call rate (call rate > 95%), and minor allele frequency (MAF > 1%), and 1,716,999 of 2,602,667 SNPs were included in the GWAS ([Supplementary Figure 4](#SD1)).

### GWAS and replication

In the discovery GWAS, ototoxicity was defined as Chang grade > 0 and was modeled as a time-to-event variable to consider the onset of hearing loss relative to cisplatin therapy. Association of SNP genotype and ototoxicity was evaluated by the Cox regression model, with genetic ancestries (PC1-5 inferred by EIGENSTRAT^32^, [Supplementary Figure 11](#SD1)), craniospinal irradiation dose (< 25Gy or ≥ 25Gy), treatment protocol (SJMB96 or SJMB03), and age at diagnosis as covariates. To ensure adequate correction for population stratification in the GWAS, we constructed a quantile-quantile (Q-Q) plot and there was only minimal inflation at the upper tail of the distribution (λ = 1.04, [Supplementary Figure 12](#SD1)). Permutation was performed for genome-wide significant SNP(s) (*P* < 5×10^-8^), by randomly assigning the residuals from the regression model of ototoxicity and non-SNP variables^33^. The permutation *P* value of a SNP is the fraction of the permutations for which this variant had a *P* value less than or equal to that with the unpermuated data. The correlation of *ACYP2* SNP genotype (0, 1, and 2) and severity of ototoxicity (Chang grade 0, 1a-1b, 2a-2b, and 3-4) was also evaluated, using an ordinal regression approach.

*ACYP2* SNPs rs1872328 and rs7604464 were then tested in the replication study of 68 children from the SJYC07 protocol, for which we adopted the Fine and Gray regression model^34^ to accommodate the relatively common progressive disease in this cohort as competing events.

Association between *ACYP2* gene expression and cisplatin IC50^35^ was assessed by a linear regression model in HapMap CEU lymphoblastoid cell lines ([GSE11582](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE11582)^36^).

R 3.0 statistical software was used for all analyses unless indicated otherwise. Statistical tests were two-sided and chosen as appropriate according to the phenotype distribution.

### ACYP2 resequencing

Sanger sequencing was performed to identify additional variants in the exonic region of the *ACYP2* gene in 257 patients included in the discovery and replication cohorts with sufficient germline genomic DNA. First, exons 1, 2, 3, and 4 were amplified by PCR (primers are listed in [Supplementary Table 5](#SD1)), followed by Sanger sequencing. Sequence analysis and variant calling was performed directly from chromatograms using the CLC Genomics Workbench version 4.

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgments

We thank Stacy Throm, PhD, for coordinating patient samples, Sarah Hughes for curating the ototoxicity data, all patients and their parents who participated in the St. Jude protocols included in this study, Grace Koh from Department of Paediatrics, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore for her assistance in genome-wide genotyping, and Leslie Robison PhD and Kirsten Ness PhD at Department of Epidemiology and Cancer Control at St. Jude for insightful discussions. This work was supported by National Institutes of Health (P30CA21765-34 and U01GM92666) and American Lebanese Syrian Associated Charities (ALSAC).

## Footnotes

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Supplementary Materials

### Supplementary Materials

## References

1. Cheung NV, Heller G. Chemotherapy dose intensity correlates strongly with response, median survival, and median progression-free survival in metastatic neuroblastoma. J Clin Oncol. 1991;9:1050–8. doi: 10.1200/JCO.1991.9.6.1050.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.1991.9.6.1050) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2033419/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Chemotherapy%20dose%20intensity%20correlates%20strongly%20with%20response,%20median%20survival,%20and%20median%20progression-free%20survival%20in%20metastatic%20neuroblastoma&author=NV%20Cheung&author=G%20Heller&volume=9&publication_year=1991&pages=1050-8&pmid=2033419&doi=10.1200/JCO.1991.9.6.1050&)

2. Perilongo G, et al. Cisplatin versus cisplatin plus doxorubicin for standard-risk hepatoblastoma. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:1662–70. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0810613.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0810613) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19846851/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N%20Engl%20J%20Med&title=Cisplatin%20versus%20cisplatin%20plus%20doxorubicin%20for%20standard-risk%20hepatoblastoma&author=G%20Perilongo&volume=361&publication_year=2009&pages=1662-70&pmid=19846851&doi=10.1056/NEJMoa0810613&)

3. Williams SD, et al. Treatment of disseminated germ-cell tumors with cisplatin, bleomycin, and either vinblastine or etoposide. N Engl J Med. 1987;316:1435–40. doi: 10.1056/NEJM198706043162302.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM198706043162302) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2437455/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N%20Engl%20J%20Med&title=Treatment%20of%20disseminated%20germ-cell%20tumors%20with%20cisplatin,%20bleomycin,%20and%20either%20vinblastine%20or%20etoposide&author=SD%20Williams&volume=316&publication_year=1987&pages=1435-40&pmid=2437455&doi=10.1056/NEJM198706043162302&)

4. Brock PR, et al. Platinum-induced ototoxicity in children: a consensus review on mechanisms, predisposition, and protection, including a new International Society of Pediatric Oncology Boston ototoxicity scale. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:2408–17. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.39.1110.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2011.39.1110) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3675696/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22547603/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Platinum-induced%20ototoxicity%20in%20children:%20a%20consensus%20review%20on%20mechanisms,%20predisposition,%20and%20protection,%20including%20a%20new%20International%20Society%20of%20Pediatric%20Oncology%20Boston%20ototoxicity%20scale&author=PR%20Brock&volume=30&publication_year=2012&pages=2408-17&pmid=22547603&doi=10.1200/JCO.2011.39.1110&)

5. Langer T, am Zehnhoff-Dinnesen A, Radtke S, Meitert J, Zolk O. Understanding platinum-induced ototoxicity. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2013;34:458–69. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2013.05.006.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2013.05.006) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23769626/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Trends%20Pharmacol%20Sci&title=Understanding%20platinum-induced%20ototoxicity&author=T%20Langer&author=A%20am%20Zehnhoff-Dinnesen&author=S%20Radtke&author=J%20Meitert&author=O%20Zolk&volume=34&publication_year=2013&pages=458-69&pmid=23769626&doi=10.1016/j.tips.2013.05.006&)

6. Qaddoumi I, et al. Carboplatin-associated ototoxicity in children with retinoblastoma. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:1034–41. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.36.9744.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2011.36.9744) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3341147/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22370329/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Carboplatin-associated%20ototoxicity%20in%20children%20with%20retinoblastoma&author=I%20Qaddoumi&volume=30&publication_year=2012&pages=1034-41&pmid=22370329&doi=10.1200/JCO.2011.36.9744&)

7. Dean JB, et al. Hearing loss in pediatric oncology patients receiving carboplatin-containing regimens. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2008;30:130–4. doi: 10.1097/MPH.0b013e31815d1d83.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/MPH.0b013e31815d1d83) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18376265/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Pediatr%20Hematol%20Oncol&title=Hearing%20loss%20in%20pediatric%20oncology%20patients%20receiving%20carboplatin-containing%20regimens&author=JB%20Dean&volume=30&publication_year=2008&pages=130-4&pmid=18376265&doi=10.1097/MPH.0b013e31815d1d83&)

8. Kushner BH, Budnick A, Kramer K, Modak S, Cheung NK. Ototoxicity from high-dose use of platinum compounds in patients with neuroblastoma. Cancer. 2006;107:417–22. doi: 10.1002/cncr.22004.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.22004) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16779793/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer&title=Ototoxicity%20from%20high-dose%20use%20of%20platinum%20compounds%20in%20patients%20with%20neuroblastoma&author=BH%20Kushner&author=A%20Budnick&author=K%20Kramer&author=S%20Modak&author=NK%20Cheung&volume=107&publication_year=2006&pages=417-22&pmid=16779793&doi=10.1002/cncr.22004&)

9. Chen WC, et al. Sensorineural hearing loss in combined modality treatment of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Cancer. 2006;106:820–9. doi: 10.1002/cncr.21683.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.21683) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16421885/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer&title=Sensorineural%20hearing%20loss%20in%20combined%20modality%20treatment%20of%20nasopharyngeal%20carcinoma&author=WC%20Chen&volume=106&publication_year=2006&pages=820-9&pmid=16421885&doi=10.1002/cncr.21683&)

10. Li Y, Womer RB, Silber JH. Predicting cisplatin ototoxicity in children: the influence of age and the cumulative dose. Eur J Cancer. 2004;40:2445–51. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2003.08.009.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2003.08.009) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15519518/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20J%20Cancer&title=Predicting%20cisplatin%20ototoxicity%20in%20children:%20the%20influence%20of%20age%20and%20the%20cumulative%20dose&author=Y%20Li&author=RB%20Womer&author=JH%20Silber&volume=40&publication_year=2004&pages=2445-51&pmid=15519518&doi=10.1016/j.ejca.2003.08.009&)

11. Oldenburg J, Kraggerud SM, Cvancarova M, Lothe RA, Fossa SD. Cisplatin-induced long-term hearing impairment is associated with specific glutathione s-transferase genotypes in testicular cancer survivors. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:708–14. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2006.08.9599.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2006.08.9599) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17228018/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Cisplatin-induced%20long-term%20hearing%20impairment%20is%20associated%20with%20specific%20glutathione%20s-transferase%20genotypes%20in%20testicular%20cancer%20survivors&author=J%20Oldenburg&author=SM%20Kraggerud&author=M%20Cvancarova&author=RA%20Lothe&author=SD%20Fossa&volume=25&publication_year=2007&pages=708-14&pmid=17228018&doi=10.1200/JCO.2006.08.9599&)

12. Fouladi M, et al. Amifostine protects against cisplatin-induced ototoxicity in children with average-risk medulloblastoma. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:3749–55. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2007.14.3974.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2007.14.3974) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2504739/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18669462/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Amifostine%20protects%20against%20cisplatin-induced%20ototoxicity%20in%20children%20with%20average-risk%20medulloblastoma&author=M%20Fouladi&volume=26&publication_year=2008&pages=3749-55&pmid=18669462&doi=10.1200/JCO.2007.14.3974&)

13. Travis LB, et al. Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neurotoxicity and ototoxicity: new paradigms for translational genomics. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014;106 doi: 10.1093/jnci/dju044.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/dju044) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4568989/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24623533/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Natl%20Cancer%20Inst&title=Chemotherapy-induced%20peripheral%20neurotoxicity%20and%20ototoxicity:%20new%20paradigms%20for%20translational%20genomics&author=LB%20Travis&volume=106&publication_year=2014&pmid=24623533&doi=10.1093/jnci/dju044&)

14. Mukherjea D, Rybak LP. Pharmacogenomics of cisplatin-induced ototoxicity. Pharmacogenomics. 2011;12:1039–50. doi: 10.2217/pgs.11.48.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2217/pgs.11.48) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3217465/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21787192/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics&title=Pharmacogenomics%20of%20cisplatin-induced%20ototoxicity&author=D%20Mukherjea&author=LP%20Rybak&volume=12&publication_year=2011&pages=1039-50&pmid=21787192&doi=10.2217/pgs.11.48&)

15. Gurney JG, et al. Evaluation of amifostine for protection against cisplatin-induced serious hearing loss in children treated for average-risk or high-risk medulloblastoma. Neuro Oncol. 2014;16:848–55. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/not241.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/neuonc/not241) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4022215/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24414535/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuro%20Oncol&title=Evaluation%20of%20amifostine%20for%20protection%20against%20cisplatin-induced%20serious%20hearing%20loss%20in%20children%20treated%20for%20average-risk%20or%20high-risk%20medulloblastoma&author=JG%20Gurney&volume=16&publication_year=2014&pages=848-55&pmid=24414535&doi=10.1093/neuonc/not241&)

16. Ross CJ, et al. Genetic variants in TPMT and COMT are associated with hearing loss in children receiving cisplatin chemotherapy. Nat Genet. 2009;41:1345–9. doi: 10.1038/ng.478.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.478) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19898482/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=Genetic%20variants%20in%20TPMT%20and%20COMT%20are%20associated%20with%20hearing%20loss%20in%20children%20receiving%20cisplatin%20chemotherapy&author=CJ%20Ross&volume=41&publication_year=2009&pages=1345-9&pmid=19898482&doi=10.1038/ng.478&)

17. Pussegoda K, et al. Replication of TPMT and ABCC3 genetic variants highly associated with cisplatin-induced hearing loss in children. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2013;94:243–51. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2013.80.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/clpt.2013.80) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4006820/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23588304/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Pharmacol%20Ther&title=Replication%20of%20TPMT%20and%20ABCC3%20genetic%20variants%20highly%20associated%20with%20cisplatin-induced%20hearing%20loss%20in%20children&author=K%20Pussegoda&volume=94&publication_year=2013&pages=243-51&pmid=23588304&doi=10.1038/clpt.2013.80&)

18. Yang JJ, et al. The role of inherited TPMT and COMT genetic variation in cisplatin-induced ototoxicity in children with cancer. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2013;94:252–9. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2013.121.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/clpt.2013.121) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3883563/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23820299/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Pharmacol%20Ther&title=The%20role%20of%20inherited%20TPMT%20and%20COMT%20genetic%20variation%20in%20cisplatin-induced%20ototoxicity%20in%20children%20with%20cancer&author=JJ%20Yang&volume=94&publication_year=2013&pages=252-9&pmid=23820299&doi=10.1038/clpt.2013.121&)

19. Lanvers-Kaminsky C, et al. Evaluation of pharmacogenetic markers to predict the risk of Cisplatin-induced ototoxicity. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2014;96:156–7. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2014.67.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/clpt.2014.67) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24642735/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Pharmacol%20Ther&title=Evaluation%20of%20pharmacogenetic%20markers%20to%20predict%20the%20risk%20of%20Cisplatin-induced%20ototoxicity&author=C%20Lanvers-Kaminsky&volume=96&publication_year=2014&pages=156-7&pmid=24642735&doi=10.1038/clpt.2014.67&)

20. Ratain MJ, Cox NJ, Henderson TO. Challenges in interpreting the evidence for genetic predictors of ototoxicity. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2013;94:631–5. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2013.178.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/clpt.2013.178) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24241639/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Pharmacol%20Ther&title=Challenges%20in%20interpreting%20the%20evidence%20for%20genetic%20predictors%20of%20ototoxicity&author=MJ%20Ratain&author=NJ%20Cox&author=TO%20Henderson&volume=94&publication_year=2013&pages=631-5&pmid=24241639&doi=10.1038/clpt.2013.178&)

21. Boddy AV. Genetics of cisplatin ototoxicity: confirming the unexplained? Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2013;94:198–200. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2013.116.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/clpt.2013.116) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23872836/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Pharmacol%20Ther&title=Genetics%20of%20cisplatin%20ototoxicity:%20confirming%20the%20unexplained?&author=AV%20Boddy&volume=94&publication_year=2013&pages=198-200&pmid=23872836&doi=10.1038/clpt.2013.116&)

22. Landier W, et al. Ototoxicity in children with high-risk neuroblastoma: prevalence, risk factors, and concordance of grading scales--a report from the Children's Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32:527–34. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2013.51.2038.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2013.51.2038) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3918536/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24419114/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Ototoxicity%20in%20children%20with%20high-risk%20neuroblastoma:%20prevalence,%20risk%20factors,%20and%20concordance%20of%20grading%20scales--a%20report%20from%20the%20Children's%20Oncology%20Group&author=W%20Landier&volume=32&publication_year=2014&pages=527-34&pmid=24419114&doi=10.1200/JCO.2013.51.2038&)

23. Bass JK, et al. Concordance between the chang and the International Society of Pediatric Oncology (SIOP) ototoxicity grading scales in patients treated with cisplatin for medulloblastoma. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2014;61:601–5. doi: 10.1002/pbc.24830.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.24830) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4371725/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24504791/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pediatr%20Blood%20Cancer&title=Concordance%20between%20the%20chang%20and%20the%20International%20Society%20of%20Pediatric%20Oncology%20(SIOP)%20ototoxicity%20grading%20scales%20in%20patients%20treated%20with%20cisplatin%20for%20medulloblastoma&author=JK%20Bass&volume=61&publication_year=2014&pages=601-5&pmid=24504791&doi=10.1002/pbc.24830&)

24. Won HH, et al. Polymorphic markers associated with severe oxaliplatin-induced, chronic peripheral neuropathy in colon cancer patients. Cancer. 2012;118:2828–36. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26614.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.26614) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22020760/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer&title=Polymorphic%20markers%20associated%20with%20severe%20oxaliplatin-induced,%20chronic%20peripheral%20neuropathy%20in%20colon%20cancer%20patients&author=HH%20Won&volume=118&publication_year=2012&pages=2828-36&pmid=22020760&doi=10.1002/cncr.26614&)

25. Oguri T, et al. Genetic polymorphisms associated with oxaliplatin-induced peripheral neurotoxicity in Japanese patients with colorectal cancer. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2013;51:475–81. doi: 10.5414/CP201851.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.5414/CP201851) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23547850/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int%20J%20Clin%20Pharmacol%20Ther&title=Genetic%20polymorphisms%20associated%20with%20oxaliplatin-induced%20peripheral%20neurotoxicity%20in%20Japanese%20patients%20with%20colorectal%20cancer&author=T%20Oguri&volume=51&publication_year=2013&pages=475-81&pmid=23547850&doi=10.5414/CP201851&)

26. Degl'Innocenti D, et al. Acylphosphatase expression during macrophage differentiation and activation of U-937 cell line. Biochimie. 1999;81:1031–5. doi: 10.1016/s0300-9084(99)00333-8.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0300-9084(99)00333-8) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10575358/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biochimie&title=Acylphosphatase%20expression%20during%20macrophage%20differentiation%20and%20activation%20of%20U-937%20cell%20line&author=D%20Degl'Innocenti&volume=81&publication_year=1999&pages=1031-5&pmid=10575358&doi=10.1016/s0300-9084(99)00333-8&)

27. Liu H, et al. Characterization of transcriptomes of cochlear inner and outer hair cells. J Neurosci. 2014;34:11085–95. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1690-14.2014.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1690-14.2014) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4131018/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25122905/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Neurosci&title=Characterization%20of%20transcriptomes%20of%20cochlear%20inner%20and%20outer%20hair%20cells&author=H%20Liu&volume=34&publication_year=2014&pages=11085-95&pmid=25122905&doi=10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1690-14.2014&)

28. Fuchs PA. A ‘calcium capacitor’ shapes cholinergic inhibition of cochlear hair cells. J Physiol. 2014 doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2013.267914.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2013.267914) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4229337/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24566542/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Physiol&title=A%20%E2%80%98calcium%20capacitor%E2%80%99%20shapes%20cholinergic%20inhibition%20of%20cochlear%20hair%20cells&author=PA%20Fuchs&publication_year=2014&pmid=24566542&doi=10.1113/jphysiol.2013.267914&)

29. Thomas AJ, et al. Functional mechanotransduction is required for cisplatin-induced hair cell death in the zebrafish lateral line. J Neurosci. 2013;33:4405–14. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3940-12.2013.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3940-12.2013) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3666553/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23467357/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Neurosci&title=Functional%20mechanotransduction%20is%20required%20for%20cisplatin-induced%20hair%20cell%20death%20in%20the%20zebrafish%20lateral%20line&author=AJ%20Thomas&volume=33&publication_year=2013&pages=4405-14&pmid=23467357&doi=10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3940-12.2013&)

30. Gajjar A, et al. Risk-adapted craniospinal radiotherapy followed by high-dose chemotherapy and stem-cell rescue in children with newly diagnosed medulloblastoma (St Jude Medulloblastoma-96): long-term results from a prospective, multicentre trial. Lancet Oncol. 2006;7:813–20. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(06)70867-1.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(06)70867-1) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17012043/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Lancet%20Oncol&title=Risk-adapted%20craniospinal%20radiotherapy%20followed%20by%20high-dose%20chemotherapy%20and%20stem-cell%20rescue%20in%20children%20with%20newly%20diagnosed%20medulloblastoma%20(St%20Jude%20Medulloblastoma-96):%20long-term%20results%20from%20a%20prospective,%20multicentre%20trial&author=A%20Gajjar&volume=7&publication_year=2006&pages=813-20&pmid=17012043&doi=10.1016/S1470-2045(06)70867-1&)

31. Chang KW, Chinosornvatana N. Practical grading system for evaluating cisplatin ototoxicity in children. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:1788–95. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.24.4228.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2009.24.4228) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20194861/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Practical%20grading%20system%20for%20evaluating%20cisplatin%20ototoxicity%20in%20children&author=KW%20Chang&author=N%20Chinosornvatana&volume=28&publication_year=2010&pages=1788-95&pmid=20194861&doi=10.1200/JCO.2009.24.4228&)

32. Patterson N, Price AL, Reich D. Population structure and eigenanalysis. PLoS Genet. 2006;2:e190. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0020190.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.0020190) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1713260/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17194218/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Genet&title=Population%20structure%20and%20eigenanalysis&author=N%20Patterson&author=AL%20Price&author=D%20Reich&volume=2&publication_year=2006&pages=e190&pmid=17194218&doi=10.1371/journal.pgen.0020190&)

33. Potter DM. A permutation test for inference in logistic regression with small- and moderate-sized data sets. Stat Med. 2005;24:693–708. doi: 10.1002/sim.1931.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.1931) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15515134/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Stat%20Med&title=A%20permutation%20test%20for%20inference%20in%20logistic%20regression%20with%20small-%20and%20moderate-sized%20data%20sets&author=DM%20Potter&volume=24&publication_year=2005&pages=693-708&pmid=15515134&doi=10.1002/sim.1931&)

34. Fine JP, Gray RJ. A Proportional Hazards Model for the Subdistribution of a Competing Risk. J Am Stat Assoc. 1999;94:496–509.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Am%20Stat%20Assoc&title=A%20Proportional%20Hazards%20Model%20for%20the%20Subdistribution%20of%20a%20Competing%20Risk&author=JP%20Fine&author=RJ%20Gray&volume=94&publication_year=1999&pages=496-509&)

35. Huang RS, et al. Identification of genetic variants contributing to cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity by use of a genomewide approach. Am J Hum Genet. 2007;81:427–37. doi: 10.1086/519850.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/519850) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1950832/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17701890/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Hum%20Genet&title=Identification%20of%20genetic%20variants%20contributing%20to%20cisplatin-induced%20cytotoxicity%20by%20use%20of%20a%20genomewide%20approach&author=RS%20Huang&volume=81&publication_year=2007&pages=427-37&pmid=17701890&doi=10.1086/519850&)

36. Choy E, et al. Genetic analysis of human traits in vitro: drug response and gene expression in lymphoblastoid cell lines. PLoS Genet. 2008;4:e1000287. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000287.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000287) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2583954/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19043577/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Genet&title=Genetic%20analysis%20of%20human%20traits%20in%20vitro:%20drug%20response%20and%20gene%20expression%20in%20lymphoblastoid%20cell%20lines&author=E%20Choy&volume=4&publication_year=2008&pages=e1000287&pmid=19043577&doi=10.1371/journal.pgen.1000287&)
