# Polymorphisms in folate-metabolizing enzymes and response to 5-fluorouracil among stage II or III rectal cancer patients (INT-0144; SWOG 9304)

## Metadata
**Authors:** Cornelia M Ulrich, Cathryn Rankin, Adetunji T Toriola, Karen W Makar, Özge Altug-Teber, Jacqueline K Benedetti, Rebecca S Holmes, Stephen R Smalley, Charles D Blanke, Heinz-Josef Lenz
**Journal:** Cancer
**Date:** 2014 Jul 15
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.28830](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.28830)
**PMID:** 25041994
**PMCID:** PMC4259283
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4259283/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4259283/pdf/nihms-619839.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4259283/pdf/nihms-619839.pdf)

## Abstract

**Purpose:** 
Recurrence and toxicity occur commonly among rectal cancer patients treated with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). We hypothesized that genetic variation in folate-metabolizing genes could play a role in the inter-individual variability. Our objective was to evaluate the associations between genetic variants in folate-metabolizing genes and clinical outcomes among rectal cancer patients treated with 5-FU.

**Experimental Design:** 
We investigated eight functionally significant polymorphisms in six genes (MTHFR (C667T, A1298C), SLC191A (G80A), SHMT1 (C1420T), DHFR (Del19bp)), TS 1494del, TSER) involved in folate metabolism in n=745 stage II or III rectal cancer patients enrolled in a phase III adjuvant clinical trial of three regimens of 5-FU and radiation therapy (INT-0144; SWOG 9304).

**Results:** 
There were no statistically significant associations between polymorphisms in any of the genes and overall survival (OS), disease free survival (DFS) and toxicity in the overall analyses. Nevertheless, there was a trend towards worse DFS among patients with the variant allele of MTHFR C677T compared to wildtype, particularly in treatment arm 2 where patients with the MTHFR C677T TT genotype had worse OS (HR=1.76; 95% CI: 1.06-2.93; p-value=0.03) and DFS (HR=1.84; 95% CI: 1.12-3.03; p-value=0.02) than those with homozygous wildtype. In addition, there was a trend towards reduced hematological toxicity among variants of SLC19A1 G80A in treatment arm 1 (p-trend=0.06) and reduced esophagitis/stomatitis among variants of TSER in treatment arm 3 (p-trend=0.06).

**Conclusions:** 
Genetic variability in folate-metabolizing enzymes was only to a limited degree associated with clinical outcomes among rectal cancer patients treated with 5-FU.

Keywords: rectal cancer, folate, MTHFR polymorphism, 5-fluorouracil, survival, toxicity, clinical trial, pharmacogenetics

### Purpose

Recurrence and toxicity occur commonly among rectal cancer patients treated with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). We hypothesized that genetic variation in folate-metabolizing genes could play a role in the inter-individual variability. Our objective was to evaluate the associations between genetic variants in folate-metabolizing genes and clinical outcomes among rectal cancer patients treated with 5-FU.

### Experimental Design

We investigated eight functionally significant polymorphisms in six genes (MTHFR (C667T, A1298C), SLC191A (G80A), SHMT1 (C1420T), *DHFR (Del19bp)*), *TS 1494del, TSER)* involved in folate metabolism in n=745 stage II or III rectal cancer patients enrolled in a phase III adjuvant clinical trial of three regimens of 5-FU and radiation therapy (INT-0144; SWOG 9304).

### Results

There were no statistically significant associations between polymorphisms in any of the genes and overall survival (OS), disease free survival (DFS) and toxicity in the overall analyses. Nevertheless, there was a trend towards worse DFS among patients with the variant allele of *MTHFR C677T* compared to wildtype, particularly in treatment arm 2 where patients with the *MTHFR C677T* TT genotype had worse OS (HR=1.76; 95% CI: 1.06-2.93; p-value=0.03) and DFS (HR=1.84; 95% CI: 1.12-3.03; p-value=0.02) than those with homozygous wildtype. In addition, there was a trend towards reduced hematological toxicity among variants of *SLC19A1* G80A in treatment arm 1 (p-trend=0.06) and reduced esophagitis/stomatitis among variants of *TSER* in treatment arm 3 (p-trend=0.06).

### Conclusions

Genetic variability in folate-metabolizing enzymes was only to a limited degree associated with clinical outcomes among rectal cancer patients treated with 5-FU.

## Introduction

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a major cause of cancer-related death. Among patients with stages II and III rectal cancer, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)-based chemotherapy regimens with radiotherapy before and/or after surgery are the standard care ^1, 2^. The major mechanism of action of 5-FU is the inhibition of thymidylate synthase (TS) through an active metabolite, which forms a complex with TS and 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate (5,10-MTHF)^3, 4^. Intracellular MTHF levels are controlled by methylene-tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), a key enzyme in folate-related one carbon metabolism (FOCM)^3, 4^. The solute carrier family 19 member 1 encoded by the *SLC19A1* gene, and dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) also play essential roles in FOCM pathway by providing tetrahydrofolate (THF) and MTHF for the cells^5-7^.

There are large inter-individual differences in therapeutic response to 5-FU and the attendant toxicities ^2^. Polymorphisms in genes involved in FOCM could explain some of the inter-individual differences in clinical response and toxicity to 5-FU ^8, 9^. Two common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the *MTHFR* gene (C677T and A1298C) confer decreased MTHFR enzyme activity ^10, 11^ and alter intracellular folate intermediates ^12^. Some studies have reported associations between *MTHFR* gene polymorphisms and clinical outcome in CRC patients, ^13-19^ while others have not ^20-27^. However, very little is known of the associations of polymorphisms in the *MTHFR* gene, other FOCM genes and clinical outcomes in rectal cancer patients. Because clinical response to 5-FU and toxicity differ substantially among rectal cancer patients ^2^, identification of predictive markers of clinical outcome and chemotherapy-related toxicity is needed in order to deliver targeted therapies ^8^.

In order to address these gaps in knowledge, we performed a comprehensive analysis of the associations between functional significant polymorphisms in *MTHFR* (C667T and A1298C), *SLC19A1* (G80A)*, SHMT1* (C1420T), *DHFR* (IVS1 del19bp), *TS 1494del, TSER* and clinical outcomes (overall survival, disease-free survival and toxicity) in rectal cancer patients (stage II or III) enrolled in a phase III adjuvant clinical trial (GI INT-0144; SWOG 9304) [1]. Our hypotheses were that polymorphisms in these genes would be associated with clinical outcomes in these patients, e.g. that the variant *MTHFR C677T* genotype would confer increased toxicity. Patients were randomly assigned to three different treatment arms: arm 1, with bolus FU in two 5-day cycles every 28 days before and after radiotherapy (XRT) plus FU via protracted venous infusion (PVI) 225 mg/m^2^/d during XRT; arm 2 (PVI-only arm), with PVI 42 days before and 56 days after XRT PVI; or arm 3 (bolus-only arm), with bolus FU + leucovorin (LV) in two 5-day cycles before and after XRT, plus bolus FU + LV (levamisole was administered each cycle before and after XRT) [1].

## Material and Methods

### Study Population and Sample Collection

Patients in this study were a subset of participants recruited into the clinical trial SWOG 9304 for whom DNA was available. The detailed description of the trial has been reported [1]. Briefly, patients were required to have had curatively resected nonmetastatic rectal adenocarcinoma. Extension through the muscularis propria and/or nodal spread (T3-4, N0 or T1-4, N1-3) was required. Patients with involved radial margins were ineligible with the exception of the extraperitoneal serosal margin (T4a). Rectal cancer was defined as tumor noted intraoperatively below the peritoneal reflection or ≤ 2 cm from the anal verge. Patients with dentate involvement were eligible. Patients were older than 18 years, had 0 to 2 performance score, and were not pregnant or lactating. No prior chemotherapy or radiation therapy for rectal cancer, or prior history of rectal cancer (with the exception of previously resected T1-2, N0, M0 tumors) was allowed. Satisfactory pretreatment laboratory parameters and the absence of serious illness were required. Chest x-ray and abdominopelvic computed tomography scans were required within 56 days of registration. Computed tomography scans were mandatory, unless bilirubin, AST, and alkaline phosphatase were within institutional normal limits, and the operative report specifically described the liver as normal. Registration was between days 20 to 70, and institutional review board approval and written informed consent were obtained.

Patients were randomly assigned to arm 1, with bolus FU in two 5-day cycles every 28 days before and after radiotherapy (XRT) plus FU via protracted venous infusion (PVI) 225 mg/m^2^/d during XRT; arm 2 (PVI-only arm), with PVI 42 days before and 56 days after XRT PVI; or arm 3 (bolus-only arm), with bolus FU + leucovorin (LV) in two 5-day cycles before and after XRT, plus bolus FU + LV (levamisole was administered each cycle before and after XRT) ^1^.

### Genotyping

Seven hundred and fifty four (754) cases were successfully genotyped and included in the analyses. Samples were genotyped for the following: *MTHFR* C667T (rs1801133) and *MTHFR* A1298C (rs1801131) were genotyped by Taqman [32], in the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center Molecular Epidemiology Laboratory (Dr. Makar) using 2x Universal Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) in 10μl reactions. *SLC19A1* G80A (rs1051266) was genotyped by Taqman [33] using 2x SNP Genotyping Master Mix (Applied Biosystems) in 10μl reactions. *SHMT1* C1420T (rs1979277) was genotyped by Taqman [34] in 10μl reactions. Taqman PCR reactions were run for 50 cycles on an ABI 7900HT sequence detection system, and real-time qPCR data was collected in addition to endpoint reads for allelic discrimination. The 19bp deletion polymorphism in intron 1 of *DHFR* was genotyped by size-dependent separation of fluorescently tagged PCR products as described [29] on an ABI 3130xl genetic analyzer and analyzed using GeneMapper software (Applied Biosystems). All assays were validated by genotyping 30 CEPH family trios from HapMap and comparing the results to known genotypes of these individuals, with no discrepancies or mendelian inheritance errors. Due to the poor quality of DNA isolated from laser capture microdissected (LCM) tissue; all samples were assayed at least twice for each polymorphism. Genotyping success rates ranged from 92.5% for *MTHFR* A1298C to 84.8% for *MTHFR* *C677T*. 5% blinded duplicates were included in every assay and duplicate concordance rates ranged from 100% for *MTHFR* C677T, 95.2% for *cSHMT1 C1420T*, 91.5% for *MTHFR* *A1298C* to 83.3% for *DHFR del*. Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium calculations showed some divergence, largely for *DHFR*. While some disequilibrium is possible in patients, there may also be some biased allele dropout. The low HWE p-value for the *DHFR* deletion may be due to the preferential loss of the longer allele as it requires a 20% longer PCR amplicon and the DNA from FFPE tissue may be degraded.

### Statistical analysis

The primary end-points of this study were overall survival (OS), disease-free survival (DFS), and toxicity. Overall survival was measured as the date from registration to death from any cause. Patients known to be alive were censored at last known date of contact. Disease-free survival was defined as time from registration to the first development of recurrent disease, or of death from any cause, whichever came first. Patients still known to be alive without recurrence at the time of analysis were considered to be censored at their last follow-up time. OS and DFS curves were generated using the Kaplan-Meier method. Toxicities defined as National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria (CTC Version 2.0) were categorized by maximum grade, evaluating at Grades 0-2 vs Grades 3-5. The maximum grade of any toxicity was identified, as well as the maximum grade of specific toxicities including hematologic, gastrointestinal, pain, and stomatitis/esophagitis.

The associations of polymorphisms with OS and DFS were analyzed using the Cox proportional hazards model (univariately and adjusted for variables used in the stratification at the time of randomization: type of surgery, nodal involvement, primary tumor stage, and time from surgery to registration). To obtain tests for trend, the genotypes were treated as continuous variables and we compared the likelihood ratio of a model without the variable using a χ^2^ test with one degree of freedom. The association between the polymorphisms and toxicity was tested using univariate logistic regression and logistic regression analysis adjusted for age, gender, and treatment arm. Genotypes were modeled using indicator variables for the heterozygous and the homozygous variant genotypes (unrestricted or co-dominant model). Given the investigations of functional candidate polymorphisms with prior hypotheses, no formal multiple comparisons adjustments were applied.

To address joint effects of two functional variants, *MTHFR* A1298C and C677T were also a priori combined into a single variable, reflecting combined genotypes coded as: 0 variants (AA, CC), one variant (AC/CC or AA/CT), or two or more variants (AA/ TT, AC/CT, AC/TT, CC/CC, CC/CT or CC/TT).

## Results

Seven hundred and fifty-four (754) eligible patients were evaluated in the study of which 482 were men and 272 were women **(Table 1)**. The patients were predominantly Caucasian (92%) and median age was 61 years (range; 19-86). The proportion of patients randomly assigned to three different arms was similar. Patients’ characteristics included in this correlative study were similar to the remaining 1100 patients in the original study for whom specimens were not available (data not shown).

### Table 1.

| Characteristics | Number of patients (N=754) |
| --- | --- |
| Gender |   |
| Male | 482 (64%) |
| Female | 272 (36%) |
| Median Age (range) | 61 (19 – 86) |
| Race |   |
| White | 695 (92%) |
| Black | 27 (4%) |
| Asian | 18 (2%) |
| Pacific Islander | 5 (<1%) |
| Native American | 4 (<1%) |
| Unknown | 5 (<1%) |
| Spanish/Hispanic Origin |   |
| No | 708 (94%) |
| Yes | 32 (4%) |
| Unknown | 14 (2%) |
| N Stage |   |
| N0 | 227 (30%) |
| N1 | 320 (42%) |
| N2-3 | 207 (27%) |
| T Stage |   |
| T1 - 2 | 111 (15%) |
| T3 – T4a | 596 (79%) |
| T4b | 47 (6%) |
| Treatment Arm |   |
| Arm 1-Bolus 5-FU + XRT | 257 (34%) |
| Arm 2-PVI 5-FU + XRT | 237 (31%) |
| Arm 3-Bolus 5-FU + LV + LEV + XRT | 260 (34%) |
| Performance Status |   |
| 0-1 | 735 (97%) |
| 2 | 19 (3%) |
| Genotype |   |
| MTHFR / A1298C (N=693) |   |
| AA | 318 (46%) |
| AC | 320 (46%) |
| CC | 55 (8%) |
| MTHFR / C677T (N=643) |   |
| CC | 301 (47%) |
| CT | 253 (39%) |
| TT | 89 (14%) |
| MTHFR A1298C, C677T (N=609) |   |
| 0 variant | 94 (15%) |
| 1 variant | 250 (41%) |
| >1 variant | 265 (44%) |
| SLC19A1 / G80A (N=669) |   |
| GG | 211 (31%) |
| GA | 300 (45%) |
| AA | 158 (24%) |
| DHFR / 19bp del (N=648) |   |
| wt/wt | 185 (28%) |
| wt/del | 268 (41%) |
| del/del | 195 (30%) |
| SHMT1 / C1420T (N=666) |   |
| CC | 332 (50%) |
| CT | 240 (36%) |
| TT | 94 (14%) |
| TS 1494del (N=719) |   |
| 6bp+/6bp+ | 236 (33%) |
| 6bp+/6bp− | 287 (40%) |
| 6bp−/6bp− | 196 (27%) |
| TSER (N=716) |   |
| 2R/2R | 134 (19%) |
| 2R/3R | 391 (54%) |
| 3R/3R | 191 (27%) |
| TSER Functional Status* (N=692) |   |
| Low | 375 (54%) |
| Intermediate | 274 (40%) |
| High | 43 (6%) |

Table 1 Caption: Patient characteristics and genotype frequencies in the study population

Evaluating all genotypes, including the combined genotypes in *MTHFR*, there were overall no statistically significant associations between any polymorphism and either OS or DFS (with or without adjusting for treatment assignment and/or stratification factors) (**Table 2**). Nevertheless, there was a marginal trend towards worse OS (p-trend=0.08) and DFS (p-trend=0.05) among variants of *MTHFR C677T* and better DFS (p-trend=0.09) among variants of the *TS 1494del*. Analyses restricted to the Caucasian population yielded similar results (data not shown). Although there was no overall statistically significant trend in OS related to the *DHFR* 19 bp deletion polymorphism, heterozygous (wt/del) had a HR= 0.76 (95%CI 0.59-0.99) compared to the homozygous (wt/wt) genotype.

### Table 3.

| Gene / Variant | Treatment Arm | Genotype | Reference | Overall Survival* |   | Disease-free Survival* |   |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   |   |   |   | HR (95% CI) | P-value | HR (95% CI) | P-value |
| MTHFR / A1298C | Arm 1 | AC | AA | 0.99 (0.67,1.45) | 0.94 | 1.00 (0.69,1.46) | 1.00 |
|   |   | CC | AA | 0.83 (0.45,1.53) | 0.55 | 0.87 (0.48,1.58) | 0.65 |
|   | Arm 2 | AC | AA | 1.01 (0.68,1.49) | 0.98 | 0.95 (0.65,1.40) | 0.80 |
|   |   | CC | AA | 0.92 (0.42,2.02) | 0.83 | 0.77 (0.35,1.69) | 0.51 |
|   | Arm 3 | AC | AA | 0.83 (0.57,1.21) | 0.34 | 0.75 (0.52,1.08) | 0.12 |
|   |   | CC | AA | 0.39 (0.12,1.25) | 0.12 | 0.50 (0.18,1.38) | 0.18 |
| MTHFR / C677T | Arm 1 | CT | CC | 1.26 (0.85,1.86) | 0.29 | 1.21 (0.82,1.78) | 0.33 |
|   |   | TT | CC | 1.08 (0.57,2.08) | 0.81 | 0.99 (0.52,1.89) | 0.97 |
|   | Arm 2 | CT | CC | 1.07 (0.68,1.69) | 0.77 | 1.14 (0.73,1.76) | 0.57 |
|   |   | TT | CC | 1.76 (1.06,2.93) | 0.03 | 1.84 (1.12,3.03) | 0.02 |
|   | Arm 3 | CT | CC | 1.17 (0.78,1.76) | 0.44 | 1.17 (0.79,1.74) | 0.44 |
|   |   | TT | CC | 1.04 (0.59,1.81) | 0.90 | 1.17 (0.69,2.01) | 0.55 |
| SLC19A1 | Arm 1 | GA | GG | 0.95 (0.62,1.46) | 0.82 | 1.02 (0.67,1.55) | 0.94 |
|   |   | AA | GG | 1.02 (0.62,1.69) | 0.92 | 0.97 (0.59,1.60) | 0.91 |
|   | Arm 2 | GA | GG | 1.33 (0.82,2.17) | 0.25 | 1.28 (0.81,2.04) | 0.30 |
|   |   | AA | GG | 1.51 (0.87,2.62) | 0.14 | 1.40 (0.82,2.38) | 0.21 |
|   | Arm 3 | GA | GG | 0.89 (0.58,1.38) | 0.62 | 0.73 (0.48,1.12) | 0.15 |
|   |   | AA | GG | 1.06 (0.65,1.73) | 0.82 | 0.90 (0.56,1.44) | 0.66 |
| DHFR del | Arm 1 | Het | wt | 0.78 (0.50,1.22) | 0.26 | 0.89 (0.57,1.38) | 0.59 |
|   |   | Mut | wt | 1.11 (0.70,1.76) | 0.65 | 1.15 (0.73,1.83) | 0.54 |
|   | Arm 2 | Het | wt | 0.82 (0.52,1.29) | 0.39 | 0.79 (0.50,1.23) | 0.30 |
|   |   | Mut | wt | 0.61 (0.37,1.03) | 0.06 | 0.73 (0.45,1.19) | 0.21 |
|   | Arm 3 | Het | wt | 0.72 (0.45,1.13) | 0.15 | 0.88 (0.56,1.37) | 0.56 |
|   |   | Mut | wt | 0.94 (0.58,1.52) | 0.80 | 0.89 (0.55,1.44) | 0.63 |
| SHMT1 / C1420T | Arm 1 | CT | CC | 1.00 (0.67,1.50) | 0.99 | 0.96 (0.65,1.43) | 0.86 |
|   |   | TT | CC | 1.24 (0.77,2.02) | 0.40 | 1.28 (0.80,2.05) | 0.31 |
|   | Arm 2 | CT | CC | 0.99 (0.64,1.53) | 0.96 | 1.05 (0.68,1.61) | 0.83 |
|   |   | TT | CC | 0.54 (0.27,1.11) | 0.09 | 0.75 (0.40,1.40) | 0.37 |
|   | Arm 3 | CT | CC | 0.90 (0.60,1.35) | 0.62 | 0.99 (0.67,1.46) | 0.96 |
|   |   | TT | CC | 1.59 (0.91,2.78) | 0.10 | 1.63 (0.95,2.80) | 0.08 |
| TS 1494del | Arm 1 | 6bp+/6bp− | 6bp+/6bp+ | 1.11 (0.74,1.65) | 0.61 | 1.05 (0.71,1.57) | 0.80 |
|   |   | 6bp−/6bp− | 6bp+/6bp+ | 0.80 (0.49,1.30) | 0.37 | 0.87 (0.55,1.39) | 0.57 |
|   | Arm 2 | 6bp+/6bp− | 6bp+/6bp+ | 1.18 (0.74,1.87) | 0.49 | 1.07 (0.69,1.67) | 0.75 |
|   |   | 6bp−/6bp− | 6bp+/6bp+ | 1.16 (0.71,1.91) | 0.55 | 1.11 (0.69,1.79) | 0.66 |
|   | Arm 3 | 6bp+/6bp− | 6bp+/6bp+ | 0.65 (0.42,0.99) | 0.04 | 0.66 (0.44,0.99) | 0.05 |
|   |   | 6bp−/6bp− | 6bp+/6bp+ | 0.61 (0.39,0.98) | 0.04 | 0.55 (0.35,0.87) | 0.01 |
| TSER | Arm 1 | 2/3 | 2/2 | 0.93 (0.60,1.43) | 0.74 | 0.89 (0.59,1.36) | 0.60 |
|   |   | 3/3 | 2/2 | 0.65 (0.38,1.12) | 0.12 | 0.61 (0.36,1.03) | 0.07 |
|   | Arm 2 | 2/3 | 2/2 | 0.81 (0.49,1.33) | 0.40 | 0.77 (0.47,1.24) | 0.27 |
|   |   | 3/3 | 2/2 | 0.91 (0.53,1.58) | 0.74 | 0.81 (0.47,1.37) | 0.43 |
|   | Arm 3 | 2/3 | 2/2 | 1.12 (0.66,1.90) | 0.69 | 1.09 (0.65,1.82) | 0.75 |
|   |   | 3/3 | 2/2 | 1.10 (0.61,1.97) | 0.75 | 1.15 (0.66,2.02) | 0.62 |
| TSER Functional Status | Arm 1 | Med | Low | 0.96 (0.67,1.38) | 0.83 | 0.92 (0.64,1.32) | 0.65 |
|   |   | High | Low | 0.34 (0.11,1.09) | 0.07 | 0.32 (0.10,1.03) | 0.06 |
|   | Arm 2 | Med | Low | 0.99 (0.65,1.49) | 0.95 | 0.97 (0.65,1.44) | 0.87 |
|   |   | High | Low | 1.50 (0.71,3.15) | 0.28 | 1.46 (0.72,2.95) | 0.29 |
|   | Arm 3 | Med | Low | 1.02 (0.69,1.50) | 0.93 | 0.97 (0.67,1.41) | 0.88 |
|   |   | High | Low | 1.11 (0.55,2.24) | 0.77 | 1.14 (0.58,2.22) | 0.70 |

Table 3 Caption: Polymorphisms in folate metabolism in relation to survival by treatment arm

We also explored analyses separately by treatment arm **(Table 3)**. These analyses revealed few differences compared to the overall analyses, with the exception that patients with the *MTHFR C677T* TT genotype compared to those with homozygous wildtype at C677T locus had worse OS (HR=1.76; 95% CI: 1.06-2.93; *p*=0.03) and DFS (HR=1.84; 95% CI: 1.12-3.03; *p*=0.02) in treatment arm 2 (PVI-only arm - PVI before and after XRT). On the other hand, variants of the *TS 1494del* genotype had better OS and DFS than the wildtype in treatment arm 3 (bolus-only arm - with bolus FU + leucovorin (LV) before and after XRT). The HRs for OS comparing those with *TS 1494del−/− and +/−* genotypes were 0.61 (95%CI 0.39-0.98, p-value=0.04) and 0.65 (95%CI 0.42-0.99, p-value=0.04), respectively.

## Toxicity Analysis

Because some of the toxicities, especially hematologic, in the overall trial differed by treatment arm ^1^, we performed stratified analyses for this endpoint. There was a trend towards increased gastrointestinal toxicity among variants of *MTHFR C677T* genotype in treatment arm 1 (HRs comparing TT and CT genotypes to CC were 2.97; 95%CI 1.13–7.86 and 1.29; 95%CI 0.72–2.30 respectively, p-trend=0.09). There were also trends towards reduced hematological toxicity among variants of *SLC19A1 G80A* in treatment arm 1 (HRs comparing AA and GA genotypes to GG genotype were 0.47; 95%CI 0.22– 1.00 and 0.83 95% CI 0.45– 1.56, p-trend=0.08) and reduced esophagitis/stomatitis among variants of *TSER* in treatment arm 3 (p-trend=0.06). However, no consistent patterns were observed across treatment arms.

## Discussion

In this randomized controlled trial, we observed no statistically significant associations between functional polymorphisms in *MTHFR, DHFR, SLC19A1, SHMT1, TS 1494del* and *TSER* genes and clinical outcomes among stage II or III rectal cancer patients. Nevertheless, we observed worse OS and DFS among variants of *MTHFR C677T* and better OS and DFS among variants of *TS 1494del* compared to the wildtypes in analyses stratified by treatment arm.

Although few studies have investigated the associations of *MTHFR* genotypes with outcomes among rectal cancer patients, our findings are, in general, similar to what has been reported among colorectal cancer patients where studies, often small-sized, have observed no significant associations between *MTHFR* genotypes and OS or DFS [13, 14, 6, 19, 21, 23]. Likewise in a previous study among rectal cancer patients, *MTHFR* genotypes were not associated with OS and DFS among patients with rectal cancer, although they were associated with 5-FU toxicity ^28^.

Nevertheless, our findings suggest that whatever impact these variants may have on OS and DFS appear limited to only patients in a particular treatment arm (treatment arm 2 for *MTHFR C677T* TT and treatment arm 3 for *TS* 1494del genotype), which could be useful in targeted intervention. The *MTHFR* 677T allele has also been associated with lower response rates and worse tumor regression grade in rectal cancer patients receiving 5-FU-based chemotherapy ^26, 29, 30^. In a small study with 125 patients, the *MTHFR 677T-1298A* haplotype was associated with poor response to treatment ^29^. Rectal cancer patients without the *MTHFR* 677T-1298A haplotype had a 71% better response rate than patients with the *MTHFR* 677T-1298A haplotype ^29^. MTHFR is an essential regulatory enzyme in folate metabolism that diverts folate metabolites from pyrimidine synthesis towards methionine synthesis ^8^. The C to T mutation, which occurs commonly among Caucasians ^31, 32^, results in a reduction in MTHFR activity leading to lower levels of 5-methylTHF, accumulation of 5,10-methyleneTHF and elevated circulating homocysteine concentrations in people with borderline folate status ^31-34^.

We observed no overall statistically significant associations between *TS* genotypes and OS and DFS. Among patients in treatment arm 3, however, variants in the *TS 1494del* gene were associated with better OS and DFS compared with the wildtype which has an allele frequency of 0.29 ^35^. There are conflicting reports on the associations of *TS* genotypes with clinical outcomes among rectal cancer patients treated with 5-FU. Some studies have reported associations of *TS* genotypes with DFS and tumor regression while others have not ^36-39^. However, most of these studies had small number of patients and were conducted in the neoadjuvant setting.

We observed no significant associations between *DHFR* 19 bp deletion*, SHMT1* C1420T*, SLC19A1* G80A polymorphisms and OS and DFS. The *DHFR* genotypes affect serum folate levels and thus could potentially mediate the effect of 5-FU treatment in cancer patients ^40-42^. Homozygosity for the 19 bp deletion polymorphism in intron 1 of *DHFR* is related to an increase in *DHFR* mRNA ^43^ and a decrease in plasma homocysteine ^41^. Although the heterozygous genotype for the 19 bp deletion polymorphism in *DHFR* gene was marginally associated with OS in our study, the homozygous genotype was not. The result needs to be interpreted with caution since the trend analysis was not statistically significant.

We observed no statistically significant associations between these genotypes and toxicity, although for some genotypes, our analyses suggest that the effect on toxicity might depend on type of treatment. In a previous study among rectal cancer patients, the *MTHFR* haplotype (677C–1298C) was shown to be protective against severe diarrhea and mucositis among patients treated with 5-FU but not among those treated with combined 5-FU/irinotecan ^28^. Furthermore, patients with the *1298A/A* genotype were reported to have a higher risk of developing grade 3–4 diarrhea or mucositis compared to patients with the A/C or C/C ^28^, we did not observe such differences in our analyses of combined *MTHFR* genotypes.

The therapeutic effectiveness and cytotoxicity of 5-FU is due to the impact of folate on DNA replication ^3, 4^. Cancer cells as well as normal but rapidly replicating cells of the gastrointestinal and hematopoietic systems are especially susceptible to the effects of 5-FU, hence, the major sites of 5-FU toxicity are the gastrointestinal and hematopoietic cells ^4^. *MTHFR* and *TS* genotypes have been reported to modify the severity of oral mucositis following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation ^44^.

## Strengths

Our study has several strengths. It is a large study ancillary to a completed clinical trial with a well-defined clinical database. The 5-FU chemotherapy and radiation therapy were administered according to a well-defined study protocol, and toxicities were coded according to established criteria and guidelines.

## Limitations

Although the number of participants was large, because of limited DNA availability, it represented only 40% of patients registered for the clinical trial. Moreover, due to differing adverse event profiles in the three study arms, the sample sizes to assess the associations between genotypes and adverse events required separate analyses within treatment arms, limiting the power to detect associations. Due to the poor quality of DNA isolated from FFPE -LCM tissue, we were unable to obtain genotypes for all 792 of the patients for whom we had specimens, despite up to three attempts. We also recognize that the stratification resulted in a number of statistical comparisons; results thus require further replication in comparable settings.

## Conclusions

Genetic variability in folate-metabolizing enzymes was only to a limited degree associated with clinical outcomes among rectal cancer patients treated with 5-FU. Because of the inter-individual variability in response to 5-FU therapy and toxicity, identification of other genotypes that may predict therapeutic response and toxicity still remains a priority.

Precis: There were no statistically significant associations between eight functionally significant polymorphisms in six genes (MTHFR (C667T, A1298C), SLC191A (G80A), SHMT1 (C1420T), DHFR (Del19bp)), TS 1494del, TSER) involved in folate metabolism and overall survival (OS), disease free survival (DFS) and toxicity in the overall analyses. Nevertheless, there was a trend towards worse DFS, reduced hematological and gastrointestinal toxicities among patents with variant alleles in MTHFR C677T, SLC19A1 G80A, TSER, respectively.

| Gene | Polymorphism | Genotype | n/N (%) | Overall Survival* |   | Disease -free Survival* |   |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| HR (95% CI) | *p-value | HR (95% CI) | *p-value |  |  |  |  |
| MTHFR | A1298C | AA | 318/693 (46%) | 1.00 (reference) |   | 1.00 (reference) |   |
|   |   | AC | 320/693 (46%) | 0.94 (0.75,1.17) | 0.59 | 0.89 (0.72,1.11) | 0.31 |
|   |   | CC | 55/693 (8%) | 0.74 (0.48,1.15) | 0.19 | 0.75 (0.49,1.14) | 0.18 |
|   |   |   |   |   | ptrend =0.21 |   | ptrend =0.13 |
|   | C677T | CC | 301/643 (47%) | 1.00 (reference) |   | 1.00 (reference) |   |
|   |   | CT | 253/643 (39%) | 1.18 (0.93,1.50) | 0.17 | 1.18 (0.94,1.49) | 0.16 |
|   |   | TT | 89/643 (14%) | 1.29 (0.94,1.78) | 0.12 | 1.33 (0.97,1.81) | 0.08 |
|   |   |   |   |   | ptrend =0.08 |   | ptrend =0.05 |
|   | A1298C,C677T | 0 variant | 94/609 (15%) | 1.00 (reference) |   | 1.00 (reference) |   |
|   |   | 1 variant | 250/609 (41%) | 1.11 (0.79,1,58) | 0.54 | 1.11 (0.80,1.56) | 0.53 |
|   |   | >1 variant | 265/609 (44%) | 1.19 (0.85,1.68) | 0.32 | 1.19 (0.85,1.66) | 0.31 |
|   |   |   |   |   | ptrend =0.85 |   | ptrend =0.79 |
| SLC19A1 | G80A | GG | 211/669 (32%) | 1.00 (reference) |   | 1.00 (reference) |   |
|   |   | GA | 300/669 (45%) | 1.03 (0.80,1.34) | 0.80 | 0.97 (0.76,1.25) | 0.83 |
|   |   | AA | 158/669 (24%) | 1.17 (0.87,1.57) | 0.30 | 1.06 (0.80,1.41) | 0.68 |
|   |   |   |   |   | ptrend =0.32 |   | ptrend =0.74 |
| DHFR | Del19bp | wt/wt | 185/648 (29%) | 1.00 (reference) |   | 1.00 (reference) |   |
|   |   | wt/del | 268/648 (41%) | 0.76 (0.59,0.99) | 0.04 | 0.85 (0.66,1.10) | 0.22 |
|   |   | del/del | 195/648 (30%) | 0.88 (0.67,1.16) | 0.36 | 0.92 (0.70,1.20) | 0.53 |
|   |   |   |   |   | ptrend =0.37 |   | ptrend =0.54 |
| SHMT1 | C1420T | CC | 332/666 (50%) | 1.00 (reference) |   | 1.00 (reference) |   |
|   |   | CT | 240/666 (36%) | 0.96 (0.76,1.22) | 0.77 | 1.00 (0.79,1.26) | 0.99 |
|   |   | TT | 94/666 (14%) | 1.07 (0.78,1.48) | 0.68 | 1.18 (0.87,1.61) | 0.29 |
|   |   |   |   |   | ptrend =0.83 |   | ptrend =0.40 |
| TS 1494del |   | 6bp+/6bp+ | 236/719 | 1.00 (reference) |   | 1.00 (reference) |   |
|   |   | 6bp+/6bp− | 287/719 | 0.93 (0.73,1.19) | 0.58 | 0.89 (0.70,1.13) | 0.35 |
|   |   | 6bp−/6bp− | 196/719 | 0.81 (0.61,1.06) | 0.13 | 0.79 (0.61,1.03) | 0.09 |
|   |   |   |   |   | ptrend =0.14 |   | ptrend =0.09 |
| TSER |   | 2R/2R | 134/716 | 1.00 (reference) |   | 1.00 (reference) |   |
|   |   | 2R/3R | 391/716 | 0.93 (0.71,1.23) | 0.61 | 0.89 (0.68,1.17) | 0.41 |
|   |   | 3R/3R | 191/716 | 0.85 (0.62,1.17) | 0.32 | 0.82 (0.60,1.11) | 0.20 |
|   |   |   |   |   | ptrend =0.33 |   | ptrend =0.21 |
| TSER Functional Status |   | Low | 375/692 | 1.00 (reference) |   | 1.00 (reference) |   |
|   |   | Intermediate | 274/692 | 0.99 (0.79,1.24) | 0.94 | 0.95 (0.77,1.18) | 0.66 |
|   |   | High | 43/692 | 0.90 (0.57,1.43) | 0.66 | 0.90 (0.58,1.40) | 0.65 |
|   |   |   |   |   | ptrend =0.74 |   | ptrend =0.56 |

Table Caption: Polymorphisms in folate metabolism in relation to survival among rectal cancer patients (SWOG9304)

Precis: There were no statistically significant associations between eight functionally significant polymorphisms in six genes (MTHFR (C667T, A1298C), SLC191A (G80A), SHMT1 (C1420T), DHFR (Del19bp)), TS 1494del, TSER) involved in folate metabolism and overall survival (OS), disease free survival (DFS) and toxicity in the overall analyses. Nevertheless, there was a trend towards worse DFS, reduced hematological and gastrointestinal toxicities among patents with variant alleles in MTHFR C677T, SLC19A1 G80A, TSER, respectively.

## Acknowledgments

Financial support: This work was supported by the National Institute of Health under RO1 CA105145 and also in part by the following PHS Cooperative Agreement grant numbers awarded by the National Cancer Institute, DHHS: U10 CA32102, CA38926, CA46113 and CA58882.

## Footnotes

## References

1. Smalley SR, Benedetti JK, Williamson SK, et al. Phase III trial of fluorouracil-based chemotherapy regimens plus radiotherapy in postoperative adjuvant rectal cancer: GI INT 0144. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:3542–3547. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2005.04.9544.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2005.04.9544) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16877719/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Phase%20III%20trial%20of%20fluorouracil-based%20chemotherapy%20regimens%20plus%20radiotherapy%20in%20postoperative%20adjuvant%20rectal%20cancer:%20GI%20INT%200144.&author=SR%20Smalley&author=JK%20Benedetti&author=SK%20Williamson&volume=24&publication_year=2006&pages=3542-3547&pmid=16877719&doi=10.1200/JCO.2005.04.9544&)

2. Sauer R, Becker H, Hohenberger W, et al. Preoperative versus postoperative chemoradiotherapy for rectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:1731–1740. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa040694.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa040694) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15496622/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N%20Engl%20J%20Med&title=Preoperative%20versus%20postoperative%20chemoradiotherapy%20for%20rectal%20cancer.&author=R%20Sauer&author=H%20Becker&author=W%20Hohenberger&volume=351&publication_year=2004&pages=1731-1740&pmid=15496622&doi=10.1056/NEJMoa040694&)

3. Scartozzi M, Maccaroni E, Giampieri R, et al. 5-fluorouracil pharmacogenomics: still rocking after all these years? Pharmacogenomics. 2011;12:251–265. doi: 10.2217/pgs.10.167.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2217/pgs.10.167) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21332317/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics&title=5-fluorouracil%20pharmacogenomics:%20still%20rocking%20after%20all%20these%20years?&author=M%20Scartozzi&author=E%20Maccaroni&author=R%20Giampieri&volume=12&publication_year=2011&pages=251-265&pmid=21332317&doi=10.2217/pgs.10.167&)

4. Longley DB, Harkin DP, Johnston PG. 5-Fluorouracil: mechanisms of action and clinical strategies. Nat Rev Cancer. 2003;3:330–338. doi: 10.1038/nrc1074.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrc1074) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12724731/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Rev%20Cancer&title=5-Fluorouracil:%20mechanisms%20of%20action%20and%20clinical%20strategies.&author=DB%20Longley&author=DP%20Harkin&author=PG%20Johnston&volume=3&publication_year=2003&pages=330-338&pmid=12724731&doi=10.1038/nrc1074&)

5. Fredriksen A, Meyer K, Ueland PM, Vollset SE, Grotmol T, Schneede J. Large-scale population-based metabolic phenotyping of thirteen genetic polymorphisms related to one-carbon metabolism. Hum Mutat. 2007;28:856–865. doi: 10.1002/humu.20522.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20522) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17436311/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hum%20Mutat&title=Large-scale%20population-based%20metabolic%20phenotyping%20of%20thirteen%20genetic%20polymorphisms%20related%20to%20one-carbon%20metabolism.&author=A%20Fredriksen&author=K%20Meyer&author=PM%20Ueland&author=SE%20Vollset&author=T%20Grotmol&volume=28&publication_year=2007&pages=856-865&pmid=17436311&doi=10.1002/humu.20522&)

6. Heil SG, Van der Put NM, Waas ET, den Heijer M, Trijbels FJ, Blom HJ. Is mutated serine hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT) involved in the etiology of neural tube defects? Molecular Genetics & Metabolism. 2001;73:164–172. doi: 10.1006/mgme.2001.3175.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1006/mgme.2001.3175) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11386852/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Molecular%20Genetics%20&%20Metabolism&title=Is%20mutated%20serine%20hydroxymethyltransferase%20(SHMT)%20involved%20in%20the%20etiology%20of%20neural%20tube%20defects?&author=SG%20Heil&author=NM%20Van%20der%20Put&author=ET%20Waas&author=M%20den%20Heijer&author=FJ%20Trijbels&volume=73&publication_year=2001&pages=164-172&pmid=11386852&doi=10.1006/mgme.2001.3175&)

7. Chen J, Kyte C, Valcin M, et al. Polymorphisms in the one-carbon metabolic pathway, plasma folate levels and colorectal cancer in a prospective study. Int J Cancer. 2004;110:617–620. doi: 10.1002/ijc.20148.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.20148) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15122597/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int%20J%20Cancer&title=Polymorphisms%20in%20the%20one-carbon%20metabolic%20pathway,%20plasma%20folate%20levels%20and%20colorectal%20cancer%20in%20a%20prospective%20study.&author=J%20Chen&author=C%20Kyte&author=M%20Valcin&volume=110&publication_year=2004&pages=617-620&pmid=15122597&doi=10.1002/ijc.20148&)

8. Ulrich CM, Robien K, McLeod HL. Cancer pharmacogenetics: polymorphisms, pathways and beyond. Nat Rev Cancer. 2003;3:912–920. doi: 10.1038/nrc1233.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrc1233) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14740638/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Rev%20Cancer&title=Cancer%20pharmacogenetics:%20polymorphisms,%20pathways%20and%20beyond.&author=CM%20Ulrich&author=K%20Robien&author=HL%20McLeod&volume=3&publication_year=2003&pages=912-920&pmid=14740638&doi=10.1038/nrc1233&)

9. Robien K, Boynton A, Ulrich CM. Pharmacogenetics of folate-related drug targets in cancer treatment. Pharmacogenomics. 2005;6:673–689. doi: 10.2217/14622416.6.7.673.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2217/14622416.6.7.673) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16207145/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics&title=Pharmacogenetics%20of%20folate-related%20drug%20targets%20in%20cancer%20treatment.&author=K%20Robien&author=A%20Boynton&author=CM%20Ulrich&volume=6&publication_year=2005&pages=673-689&pmid=16207145&doi=10.2217/14622416.6.7.673&)

10. Frosst P, Blom HJ, Milos R, et al. A candidate genetic risk factor for vascular disease: a common mutation in methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase [letter]. Nat Genet. 1995;10:111–113. doi: 10.1038/ng0595-111.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0595-111) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7647779/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=A%20candidate%20genetic%20risk%20factor%20for%20vascular%20disease:%20a%20common%20mutation%20in%20methylenetetrahydrofolate%20reductase%20%5Bletter%5D.&author=P%20Frosst&author=HJ%20Blom&author=R%20Milos&volume=10&publication_year=1995&pages=111-113&pmid=7647779&doi=10.1038/ng0595-111&)

11. Weisberg I, Tran P, Christensen B, Sibani S, Rozen R. A second genetic polymorphism in methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) associated with decreased enzyme activity. Molecular Genetics & Metabolism. 1998;64:169–172. doi: 10.1006/mgme.1998.2714.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1006/mgme.1998.2714) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9719624/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Molecular%20Genetics%20&%20Metabolism&title=A%20second%20genetic%20polymorphism%20in%20methylenetetrahydrofolate%20reductase%20(MTHFR)%20associated%20with%20decreased%20enzyme%20activity.&author=I%20Weisberg&author=P%20Tran&author=B%20Christensen&author=S%20Sibani&author=R%20Rozen&volume=64&publication_year=1998&pages=169-172&pmid=9719624&doi=10.1006/mgme.1998.2714&)

12. Kawakami K, Ruszkiewicz A, Bennett G, Moore J, Watanabe G, Iacopetta B. The folate pool in colorectal cancers is associated with DNA hypermethylation and with a polymorphism in methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase. Clin Cancer Res. 2003;9:5860–5865.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14676107/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Cancer%20Res&title=The%20folate%20pool%20in%20colorectal%20cancers%20is%20associated%20with%20DNA%20hypermethylation%20and%20with%20a%20polymorphism%20in%20methylenetetrahydrofolate%20reductase.&author=K%20Kawakami&author=A%20Ruszkiewicz&author=G%20Bennett&author=J%20Moore&author=G%20Watanabe&volume=9&publication_year=2003&pages=5860-5865&pmid=14676107&)

13. Wisotzkey JK, Toman J, Bell T, Monk JS, Jones D. MTHFR (C677T) polymorphisms and stage III colon cancer: response to therapy. Molecular Diagnosis. 1999;4:95–99. doi: 10.1016/s1084-8592(99)80034-4.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1084-8592(99)80034-4) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10462625/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Molecular%20Diagnosis&title=MTHFR%20(C677T)%20polymorphisms%20and%20stage%20III%20colon%20cancer:%20response%20to%20therapy.&author=JK%20Wisotzkey&author=J%20Toman&author=T%20Bell&author=JS%20Monk&author=D%20Jones&volume=4&publication_year=1999&pages=95-99&pmid=10462625&doi=10.1016/s1084-8592(99)80034-4&)

14. Cohen V, Panet-Raymond V, Sabbaghian N, Morin I, Batist G, Rozen R. Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase Polymorphism in Advanced Colorectal Cancer: A Novel Genomic Predictor of Clinical Response to Fluoropyrimidine-based Chemotherapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2003;9:1611–1615.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12738713/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Cancer%20Res&title=Methylenetetrahydrofolate%20Reductase%20Polymorphism%20in%20Advanced%20Colorectal%20Cancer:%20A%20Novel%20Genomic%20Predictor%20of%20Clinical%20Response%20to%20Fluoropyrimidine-based%20Chemotherapy.&author=V%20Cohen&author=V%20Panet-Raymond&author=N%20Sabbaghian&author=I%20Morin&author=G%20Batist&volume=9&publication_year=2003&pages=1611-1615&pmid=12738713&)

15. Etienne MC, Ilc K, Formento JL, et al. Thymidylate synthase and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene polymorphisms: relationships with 5-fluorouracil sensitivity. Br J Cancer. 2004;90:526–534. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6601523.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bjc.6601523) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2409555/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14735204/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Br%20J%20Cancer&title=Thymidylate%20synthase%20and%20methylenetetrahydrofolate%20reductase%20gene%20polymorphisms:%20relationships%20with%205-fluorouracil%20sensitivity.&author=MC%20Etienne&author=K%20Ilc&author=JL%20Formento&volume=90&publication_year=2004&pages=526-534&pmid=14735204&doi=10.1038/sj.bjc.6601523&)

16. Jakobsen A, Nielsen JN, Gyldenkerne N, Lindeberg J. Thymidylate synthase and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene polymorphism in normal tissue as predictors of fluorouracil sensitivity. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:1365–1369. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2005.06.219.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2005.06.219) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15735113/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Thymidylate%20synthase%20and%20methylenetetrahydrofolate%20reductase%20gene%20polymorphism%20in%20normal%20tissue%20as%20predictors%20of%20fluorouracil%20sensitivity.&author=A%20Jakobsen&author=JN%20Nielsen&author=N%20Gyldenkerne&author=J%20Lindeberg&volume=23&publication_year=2005&pages=1365-1369&pmid=15735113&doi=10.1200/JCO.2005.06.219&)

17. Capitain O, Boisdron-Celle M, Poirier AL, Abadie-Lacourtoisie S, Morel A, Gamelin E. The influence of fluorouracil outcome parameters on tolerance and efficacy in patients with advanced colorectal cancer. Pharmacogenomics J. 2008;8:256–267. doi: 10.1038/sj.tpj.6500476.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.tpj.6500476) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17700593/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics%20J&title=The%20influence%20of%20fluorouracil%20outcome%20parameters%20on%20tolerance%20and%20efficacy%20in%20patients%20with%20advanced%20colorectal%20cancer.&author=O%20Capitain&author=M%20Boisdron-Celle&author=AL%20Poirier&author=S%20Abadie-Lacourtoisie&author=A%20Morel&volume=8&publication_year=2008&pages=256-267&pmid=17700593&doi=10.1038/sj.tpj.6500476&)

18. Gusella M, Frigo AC, Bolzonella C, et al. Predictors of survival and toxicity in patients on adjuvant therapy with 5-fluorouracil for colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer. 2009;100:1549–1557. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605052.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bjc.6605052) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2696766/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19384296/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Br%20J%20Cancer&title=Predictors%20of%20survival%20and%20toxicity%20in%20patients%20on%20adjuvant%20therapy%20with%205-fluorouracil%20for%20colorectal%20cancer.&author=M%20Gusella&author=AC%20Frigo&author=C%20Bolzonella&volume=100&publication_year=2009&pages=1549-1557&pmid=19384296&doi=10.1038/sj.bjc.6605052&)

19. Chua W, Goldstein D, Lee CK, et al. Molecular markers of response and toxicity to FOLFOX chemotherapy in metastatic colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer. 2009;101:998–1004. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605239.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bjc.6605239) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2743363/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19672255/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Br%20J%20Cancer&title=Molecular%20markers%20of%20response%20and%20toxicity%20to%20FOLFOX%20chemotherapy%20in%20metastatic%20colorectal%20cancer.&author=W%20Chua&author=D%20Goldstein&author=CK%20Lee&volume=101&publication_year=2009&pages=998-1004&pmid=19672255&doi=10.1038/sj.bjc.6605239&)

20. Marcuello E, Altes A, Menoyo A, Rio ED, Baiget M. Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene polymorphisms: genomic predictors of clinical response to fluoropyrimidine-based chemotherapy? Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2006;57:835–840. doi: 10.1007/s00280-005-0089-1.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00280-005-0089-1) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16187112/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Chemother%20Pharmacol&title=Methylenetetrahydrofolate%20reductase%20gene%20polymorphisms:%20genomic%20predictors%20of%20clinical%20response%20to%20fluoropyrimidine-based%20chemotherapy?&author=E%20Marcuello&author=A%20Altes&author=A%20Menoyo&author=ED%20Rio&author=M%20Baiget&volume=57&publication_year=2006&pages=835-840&pmid=16187112&doi=10.1007/s00280-005-0089-1&)

21. Suh KW, Kim JH, Kim do Y, Kim YB, Lee C, Choi S. Which gene is a dominant predictor of response during FOLFOX chemotherapy for the treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer, the MTHFR or XRCC1 gene? Ann Surg Oncol. 2006;13:1379–1385. doi: 10.1245/s10434-006-9112-y.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1245/s10434-006-9112-y) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17009149/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann%20Surg%20Oncol&title=Which%20gene%20is%20a%20dominant%20predictor%20of%20response%20during%20FOLFOX%20chemotherapy%20for%20the%20treatment%20of%20metastatic%20colorectal%20cancer,%20the%20MTHFR%20or%20XRCC1%20gene?&author=KW%20Suh&author=JH%20Kim&author=Y%20Kim%20do&author=YB%20Kim&author=C%20Lee&volume=13&publication_year=2006&pages=1379-1385&pmid=17009149&doi=10.1245/s10434-006-9112-y&)

22. Ruzzo A, Graziano F, Loupakis F, et al. Pharmacogenetic profiling in patients with advanced colorectal cancer treated with first-line FOLFOX-4 chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:1247–1254. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2006.08.1844.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2006.08.1844) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17401013/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Pharmacogenetic%20profiling%20in%20patients%20with%20advanced%20colorectal%20cancer%20treated%20with%20first-line%20FOLFOX-4%20chemotherapy.&author=A%20Ruzzo&author=F%20Graziano&author=F%20Loupakis&volume=25&publication_year=2007&pages=1247-1254&pmid=17401013&doi=10.1200/JCO.2006.08.1844&)

23. Lurje G, Zhang W, Yang D, et al. Thymidylate synthase haplotype is associated with tumor recurrence in stage II and stage III colon cancer. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2008;18:161–168. doi: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e3282f4aea6.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0b013e3282f4aea6) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18192902/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenet%20Genomics&title=Thymidylate%20synthase%20haplotype%20is%20associated%20with%20tumor%20recurrence%20in%20stage%20II%20and%20stage%20III%20colon%20cancer.&author=G%20Lurje&author=W%20Zhang&author=D%20Yang&volume=18&publication_year=2008&pages=161-168&pmid=18192902&doi=10.1097/FPC.0b013e3282f4aea6&)

24. Braun MS, Richman SD, Thompson L, et al. Association of molecular markers with toxicity outcomes in a randomized trial of chemotherapy for advanced colorectal cancer: the FOCUS trial. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:5519–5528. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.21.6283.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2008.21.6283) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19858398/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Association%20of%20molecular%20markers%20with%20toxicity%20outcomes%20in%20a%20randomized%20trial%20of%20chemotherapy%20for%20advanced%20colorectal%20cancer:%20the%20FOCUS%20trial.&author=MS%20Braun&author=SD%20Richman&author=L%20Thompson&volume=27&publication_year=2009&pages=5519-5528&pmid=19858398&doi=10.1200/JCO.2008.21.6283&)

25. Afzal S, Jensen SA, Vainer B, et al. MTHFR polymorphisms and 5-FU-based adjuvant chemotherapy in colorectal cancer. Ann Oncol. 2009;20:1660–1666. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdp046.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/annonc/mdp046) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19465420/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann%20Oncol&title=MTHFR%20polymorphisms%20and%205-FU-based%20adjuvant%20chemotherapy%20in%20colorectal%20cancer.&author=S%20Afzal&author=SA%20Jensen&author=B%20Vainer&volume=20&publication_year=2009&pages=1660-1666&pmid=19465420&doi=10.1093/annonc/mdp046&)

26. Etienne-Grimaldi M-C, Milano G, Maindrault-Gœbel F, et al. Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene polymorphisms and FOLFOX response in colorectal cancer patients. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2010;69:58–66. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2009.03556.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2125.2009.03556.x) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2830598/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20078613/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Br%20J%20Clin%20Pharmacol&title=Methylenetetrahydrofolate%20reductase%20(MTHFR)%20gene%20polymorphisms%20and%20FOLFOX%20response%20in%20colorectal%20cancer%20patients.&author=M-C%20Etienne-Grimaldi&author=G%20Milano&author=F%20Maindrault-G%C5%93bel&volume=69&publication_year=2010&pages=58-66&pmid=20078613&doi=10.1111/j.1365-2125.2009.03556.x&)

27. Glimelius B, Garmo H, Berglund A, et al. Prediction of irinotecan and 5-fluorouracil toxicity and response in patients with advanced colorectal cancer. Pharmacogenomics J. 2011;11:61–71. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2010.10.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/tpj.2010.10) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3036798/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20177420/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics%20J&title=Prediction%20of%20irinotecan%20and%205-fluorouracil%20toxicity%20and%20response%20in%20patients%20with%20advanced%20colorectal%20cancer.&author=B%20Glimelius&author=H%20Garmo&author=A%20Berglund&volume=11&publication_year=2011&pages=61-71&pmid=20177420&doi=10.1038/tpj.2010.10&)

28. Thomas F, Motsinger-Reif AA, Hoskins JM, et al. Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase genetic polymorphisms and toxicity to 5-FU-based chemoradiation in rectal cancer. Br J Cancer. 2011;105:1654–1662. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.442.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/bjc.2011.442) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3242600/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22045187/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Br%20J%20Cancer&title=Methylenetetrahydrofolate%20reductase%20genetic%20polymorphisms%20and%20toxicity%20to%205-FU-based%20chemoradiation%20in%20rectal%20cancer.&author=F%20Thomas&author=AA%20Motsinger-Reif&author=JM%20Hoskins&volume=105&publication_year=2011&pages=1654-1662&pmid=22045187&doi=10.1038/bjc.2011.442&)

29. Terrazzino S, Agostini M, Pucciarelli S, et al. A haplotype of the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene predicts poor tumor response in rectal cancer patients receiving preoperative chemoradiation. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2006;16:817–824. doi: 10.1097/01.fpc.0000230412.89973.c0.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.fpc.0000230412.89973.c0) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17047490/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenet%20Genomics&title=A%20haplotype%20of%20the%20methylenetetrahydrofolate%20reductase%20gene%20predicts%20poor%20tumor%20response%20in%20rectal%20cancer%20patients%20receiving%20preoperative%20chemoradiation.&author=S%20Terrazzino&author=M%20Agostini&author=S%20Pucciarelli&volume=16&publication_year=2006&pages=817-824&pmid=17047490&doi=10.1097/01.fpc.0000230412.89973.c0&)

30. Cecchin E, Agostini M, Pucciarelli S, et al. Tumor response is predicted by patient genetic profile in rectal cancer patients treated with neo-adjuvant chemo-radiotherapy. Pharmacogenomics J. 2011;11:214–226. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2010.25.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/tpj.2010.25) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20368715/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics%20J&title=Tumor%20response%20is%20predicted%20by%20patient%20genetic%20profile%20in%20rectal%20cancer%20patients%20treated%20with%20neo-adjuvant%20chemo-radiotherapy.&author=E%20Cecchin&author=M%20Agostini&author=S%20Pucciarelli&volume=11&publication_year=2011&pages=214-226&pmid=20368715&doi=10.1038/tpj.2010.25&)

31. Ma J, Stampfer MJ, Hennekens CH, et al. Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase polymorphism, plasma folate, homocysteine, and risk of myocardial infarction in US physicians [see comments]. Circulation. 1996;94:2410–2416. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.94.10.2410.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.94.10.2410) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8921781/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Methylenetetrahydrofolate%20reductase%20polymorphism,%20plasma%20folate,%20homocysteine,%20and%20risk%20of%20myocardial%20infarction%20in%20US%20physicians%20%5Bsee%20comments%5D.&author=J%20Ma&author=MJ%20Stampfer&author=CH%20Hennekens&volume=94&publication_year=1996&pages=2410-2416&pmid=8921781&doi=10.1161/01.cir.94.10.2410&)

32. Jacques PF, Bostom AG, Williams RR, et al. Relation between folate status, a common mutation in methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase, and plasma homocysteine concentrations [see comments]. Circulation. 1996;93:7–9. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.93.1.7.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.93.1.7) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8616944/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Relation%20between%20folate%20status,%20a%20common%20mutation%20in%20methylenetetrahydrofolate%20reductase,%20and%20plasma%20homocysteine%20concentrations%20%5Bsee%20comments%5D.&author=PF%20Jacques&author=AG%20Bostom&author=RR%20Williams&volume=93&publication_year=1996&pages=7-9&pmid=8616944&doi=10.1161/01.cir.93.1.7&)

33. Sohn K-J, Croxford R, Yates Z, Lucock M, Kim Y-I. Effect of the Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase C677T Polymorphism on Chemosensitivity of Colon and Breast Cancer Cells to 5-Fluorouracil and Methotrexate. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2004;96:134–144. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djh015.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djh015) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14734703/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Natl%20Cancer%20Inst&title=Effect%20of%20the%20Methylenetetrahydrofolate%20Reductase%20C677T%20Polymorphism%20on%20Chemosensitivity%20of%20Colon%20and%20Breast%20Cancer%20Cells%20to%205-Fluorouracil%20and%20Methotrexate.&author=K-J%20Sohn&author=R%20Croxford&author=Z%20Yates&author=M%20Lucock&author=Y-I%20Kim&volume=96&publication_year=2004&pages=134-144&pmid=14734703&doi=10.1093/jnci/djh015&)

34. Bagley PJ, Selhub J. A common mutation in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene is associated with an accumulation of formylated tetrahydrofolates in red blood cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998;95:13217–13220. doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.22.13217.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.22.13217) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC23763/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9789068/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20U%20S%20A&title=A%20common%20mutation%20in%20the%20methylenetetrahydrofolate%20reductase%20gene%20is%20associated%20with%20an%20accumulation%20of%20formylated%20tetrahydrofolates%20in%20red%20blood%20cells.&author=PJ%20Bagley&author=J%20Selhub&volume=95&publication_year=1998&pages=13217-13220&pmid=9789068&doi=10.1073/pnas.95.22.13217&)

35. Ulrich C, Bigler J, Velicer C, Greene E, Farin F, Potter J. Searching expressed sequence tag databases: discovery and confirmation of a common polymorphism in the thymidylate synthase gene. Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention. 2000;9:1381–1385.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11142426/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Epidemiology,%20Biomarkers%20&%20Prevention&title=Searching%20expressed%20sequence%20tag%20databases:%20discovery%20and%20confirmation%20of%20a%20common%20polymorphism%20in%20the%20thymidylate%20synthase%20gene.&author=C%20Ulrich&author=J%20Bigler&author=C%20Velicer&author=E%20Greene&author=F%20Farin&volume=9&publication_year=2000&pages=1381-1385&pmid=11142426&)

36. Villafranca E, Okruzhnov Y, Dominguez MA, et al. Polymorphisms of the repeated sequences in the enhancer region of the thymidylate synthase gene promoter may predict downstaging after preoperative chemoradiation in rectal cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2001;19:1779–1786. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2001.19.6.1779.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2001.19.6.1779) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11251009/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Journal%20of%20Clinical%20Oncology&title=Polymorphisms%20of%20the%20repeated%20sequences%20in%20the%20enhancer%20region%20of%20the%20thymidylate%20synthase%20gene%20promoter%20may%20predict%20downstaging%20after%20preoperative%20chemoradiation%20in%20rectal%20cancer.&author=E%20Villafranca&author=Y%20Okruzhnov&author=MA%20Dominguez&volume=19&publication_year=2001&pages=1779-1786&pmid=11251009&doi=10.1200/JCO.2001.19.6.1779&)

37. Hur H, Kang J, Kim NK, et al. Thymidylate synthase gene polymorphism affects the response to preoperative 5-fluorouracil chemoradiation therapy in patients with rectal cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;81:669–676. doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.06.049.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.06.049) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20932673/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int%20J%20Radiat%20Oncol%20Biol%20Phys&title=Thymidylate%20synthase%20gene%20polymorphism%20affects%20the%20response%20to%20preoperative%205-fluorouracil%20chemoradiation%20therapy%20in%20patients%20with%20rectal%20cancer.&author=H%20Hur&author=J%20Kang&author=NK%20Kim&volume=81&publication_year=2011&pages=669-676&pmid=20932673&doi=10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.06.049&)

38. Arrazubi V, Suarez J, Guerrero D, et al. Prognostic significance of thymidylate synthase polymorphisms in rectal cancer patients treated with neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy. Colorectal Dis. 2013;15:428–435. doi: 10.1111/codi.12009.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/codi.12009) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22958523/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Colorectal%20Dis&title=Prognostic%20significance%20of%20thymidylate%20synthase%20polymorphisms%20in%20rectal%20cancer%20patients%20treated%20with%20neoadjuvant%20chemoradiotherapy.&author=V%20Arrazubi&author=J%20Suarez&author=D%20Guerrero&volume=15&publication_year=2013&pages=428-435&pmid=22958523&doi=10.1111/codi.12009&)

39. Paez D, Pare L, Altes A, et al. Thymidylate synthase germline polymorphisms in rectal cancer patients treated with neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy based on 5-fluorouracil. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2010;136:1681–1689. doi: 10.1007/s00432-010-0826-7.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00432-010-0826-7) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC11828173/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20165956/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Cancer%20Res%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Thymidylate%20synthase%20germline%20polymorphisms%20in%20rectal%20cancer%20patients%20treated%20with%20neoadjuvant%20chemoradiotherapy%20based%20on%205-fluorouracil.&author=D%20Paez&author=L%20Pare&author=A%20Altes&volume=136&publication_year=2010&pages=1681-1689&pmid=20165956&doi=10.1007/s00432-010-0826-7&)

40. Kalmbach RD, Choumenkovitch SF, Troen AP, Jacques PF, D'Agostino R, Selhub J. A 19-base pair deletion polymorphism in dihydrofolate reductase is associated with increased unmetabolized folic acid in plasma and decreased red blood cell folate. J Nutr. 2008;138:2323–2327. doi: 10.3945/jn.108.096404.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3945/jn.108.096404) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2855991/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19022952/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Nutr&title=A%2019-base%20pair%20deletion%20polymorphism%20in%20dihydrofolate%20reductase%20is%20associated%20with%20increased%20unmetabolized%20folic%20acid%20in%20plasma%20and%20decreased%20red%20blood%20cell%20folate.&author=RD%20Kalmbach&author=SF%20Choumenkovitch&author=AP%20Troen&author=PF%20Jacques&author=R%20D'Agostino&volume=138&publication_year=2008&pages=2323-2327&pmid=19022952&doi=10.3945/jn.108.096404&)

41. Gellekink H, Blom HJ, van der Linden IJM, den Heijer M. Molecular genetic analysis of the human dihydrofolate reductase gene: relation with plasma total homocysteine, serum and red blood cell folate levels. Eur J Hum Genet. 2006;15:103–109. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201713.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201713) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16969375/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20J%20Hum%20Genet&title=Molecular%20genetic%20analysis%20of%20the%20human%20dihydrofolate%20reductase%20gene:%20relation%20with%20plasma%20total%20homocysteine,%20serum%20and%20red%20blood%20cell%20folate%20levels.&author=H%20Gellekink&author=HJ%20Blom&author=IJM%20van%20der%20Linden&author=M%20den%20Heijer&volume=15&publication_year=2006&pages=103-109&pmid=16969375&doi=10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201713&)

42. Stanislawska-Sachadyn A, Brown KS, Mitchell LE, et al. An insertion/deletion polymorphism of the dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) gene is associated with serum and red blood cell folate concentrations in women. Hum Genet. 2008;123:289–295. doi: 10.1007/s00439-008-0475-y.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-008-0475-y) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18247058/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hum%20Genet&title=An%20insertion/deletion%20polymorphism%20of%20the%20dihydrofolate%20reductase%20(DHFR)%20gene%20is%20associated%20with%20serum%20and%20red%20blood%20cell%20folate%20concentrations%20in%20women.&author=A%20Stanislawska-Sachadyn&author=KS%20Brown&author=LE%20Mitchell&volume=123&publication_year=2008&pages=289-295&pmid=18247058&doi=10.1007/s00439-008-0475-y&)

43. Xu X, Gammon MD, Wetmur JG, et al. A functional 19-base pair deletion polymorphism of dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) and risk of breast cancer in multivitamin users. Am J Clin Nutr. 2007;85:1098–1102. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/85.4.1098.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcn/85.4.1098) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17413111/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Clin%20Nutr&title=A%20functional%2019-base%20pair%20deletion%20polymorphism%20of%20dihydrofolate%20reductase%20(DHFR)%20and%20risk%20of%20breast%20cancer%20in%20multivitamin%20users.&author=X%20Xu&author=MD%20Gammon&author=JG%20Wetmur&volume=85&publication_year=2007&pages=1098-1102&pmid=17413111&doi=10.1093/ajcn/85.4.1098&)

44. Robien K, Schubert MM, Chay T, et al. Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase and thymidylate synthase genotypes modify oral mucositis severity following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2006;37:799–800. doi: 10.1038/sj.bmt.1705330.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bmt.1705330) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16501586/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bone%20Marrow%20Transplant&title=Methylenetetrahydrofolate%20reductase%20and%20thymidylate%20synthase%20genotypes%20modify%20oral%20mucositis%20severity%20following%20hematopoietic%20stem%20cell%20transplantation.&author=K%20Robien&author=MM%20Schubert&author=T%20Chay&volume=37&publication_year=2006&pages=799-800&pmid=16501586&doi=10.1038/sj.bmt.1705330&)
