# The Impact of Body Mass Index and Genetics on Warfarin Major Bleeding Outcomes in a Community Setting

## Metadata
**Authors:** Ragan Hart, David L Veenstra, Denise M Boudreau, Joshua A Roth
**Journal:** The American journal of medicine
**Date:** 2016 Sep 2
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amjmed.2016.08.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjmed.2016.08.017)
**PMID:** 27593608
**PMCID:** PMC5263176
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5263176/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5263176/pdf/nihms814458.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5263176/pdf/nihms814458.pdf)

## Abstract

**Purpose:** 
Several studies have demonstrated an association between body mass index (BMI) and warfarin therapeutic dose, but none evaluated the association of BMI with the clinically important outcome of major bleeding in a community setting. To address this evidence gap, we conducted a case-control study to evaluate the association between BMI and major bleeding risk among patients receiving warfarin.

**Methods:** 
We used a case-control study design to evaluate the association between obesity (BMI >30.0) and major bleeding risk among 265 cases and 305 controls receiving warfarin at Group Health, an integrated healthcare system in Washington State. Multivariate logistic regression was used to adjust for potential confounders derived from health plan records and a self-report survey. In exploratory analyses, we evaluated the interaction between genetic variants potentially associated with warfarin bleeding (CYP2C9, VKORC1, and CYP4F2) and obesity on the risk of major bleeding.

**Results:** 
Overall, the sample was 55% male, 94% Caucasian, and mean age was 70 years. Cases and controls had an average of 3.4 and 3.7 years of warfarin use, respectively. Obese patients had significantly lower major bleeding risk relative to non-obese patients (Odds Ratio (OR): 0.60, 95% Confidence Interval (CI): (0.39–0.92). The OR was 0.56 (95% CI: 0.35–0.90) in patients with ≥1 year of warfarin use, and 0.78 (95% CI: 0.40–1.54) in patients with <1 year of warfarin use. An exploratory analysis indicated a statistically significant interaction between CYP4F2*3 genetic status and obesity (p=0.049), suggesting a protective effect of obesity on the risk of major bleeding among those wild type for CYP4F2*3, but not among variants.

**Conclusions:** 
Our findings suggest that BMI is an important clinical factor in assessing and managing warfarin therapy. Future studies should confirm the major bleeding associations, including the interaction between obesity and CYP4F2*3 status, identified in this study and evaluate potential mechanisms.

Keywords: Warfarin, Body Mass Index, Major Bleeding, CYP2C9, VKORC1, CYP4F2, Gene-environment interaction

### Purpose

Several studies have demonstrated an association between body mass index (BMI) and warfarin therapeutic dose, but none evaluated the association of BMI with the clinically important outcome of major bleeding in a community setting. To address this evidence gap, we conducted a case-control study to evaluate the association between BMI and major bleeding risk among patients receiving warfarin.

### Methods

We used a case-control study design to evaluate the association between obesity (BMI >30.0) and major bleeding risk among 265 cases and 305 controls receiving warfarin at Group Health, an integrated healthcare system in Washington State. Multivariate logistic regression was used to adjust for potential confounders derived from health plan records and a self-report survey. In exploratory analyses, we evaluated the interaction between genetic variants potentially associated with warfarin bleeding (*CYP2C9, VKORC1*, and *CYP4F2)* and obesity on the risk of major bleeding.

### Results

Overall, the sample was 55% male, 94% Caucasian, and mean age was 70 years. Cases and controls had an average of 3.4 and 3.7 years of warfarin use, respectively. Obese patients had significantly lower major bleeding risk relative to non-obese patients (Odds Ratio (OR): 0.60, 95% Confidence Interval (CI): (0.39–0.92). The OR was 0.56 (95% CI: 0.35–0.90) in patients with ≥1 year of warfarin use, and 0.78 (95% CI: 0.40–1.54) in patients with <1 year of warfarin use. An exploratory analysis indicated a statistically significant interaction between *CYP4F2*3* genetic status and obesity (p=0.049), suggesting a protective effect of obesity on the risk of major bleeding among those wild type for *CYP4F2*3*, but not among variants.

### Conclusions

Our findings suggest that BMI is an important clinical factor in assessing and managing warfarin therapy. Future studies should confirm the major bleeding associations, including the interaction between obesity and *CYP4F2*3* status, identified in this study and evaluate potential mechanisms.

## INTRODUCTION

Warfarin (Coumadin®) is a commonly prescribed anticoagulant that is highly effective in reducing blood clotting events in patients with medical conditions that confer increased risk (e.g. atrial fibrillation, myocardial infarction, and heart valve replacement).^1–6^ However, warfarin management is difficult because giving too high of a dose can result in increased risk of major bleeding (e.g. cerebral hemorrhage), giving too low of a dose can increase risk of serious clots (e.g. stroke), and dose requirements are highly variable. For example, dose requirements are impacted by concomitant drug use, diet, alcohol use, and genetic status.^4, 7, 8^ Collectively, these factors create a significant barrier to appropriate use of this otherwise effective and inexpensive drug that prevents potentially serious clotting events. This is important at a population level because an estimated 2 million Americans currently use warfarin, despite the availability of newer anticoagulant medications.^2, 4, 9^ Accordingly, it is critical to continue to identify warfarin major bleeding risk factors to improve warfarin outcomes, enhance patient and provider confidence, and provide high value anticoagulation care.

Studies have shown that body mass index (BMI) impacts warfarin volume of distribution and clearance, and is positively correlated with coagulation factor levels (VII, VIIIc, fibrinogen)^10, 11^ —suggesting potential mechanisms for BMI to impact clinical outcomes. For example, Mueller and colleagues demonstrated that for each 1-point increase in BMI, the average weekly therapeutic dose of warfarin increased by 0.69 milligrams.^12^ Because a typical weekly warfarin dose is 30–40mg, not accounting for BMI can result in clinically important deviations in dose. No studies to date have evaluated if this relationship extends to the clinically important warfarin outcome of major bleeding risk.^10–14^

Genetics also play an important role in warfarin outcomes. Recent studies have identified three genes that impact warfarin dose requirements and major bleeding risk–*CYP2C9*, *VKORC1*, and *CYP4F2*.^4, 7, 15–18^ *CYP2C9* is primarily responsible for the metabolism of warfarin, *VKORC1* is the warfarin drug target, and *CYP4F2* is associated with enzymatic activity in the vitamin K/warfarin pathway and may also be associated with vitamin K metabolism.^4, 13, 16, 17^ Variants of *CYP2C9* (*CYP2C9***2*, rs17998523 or *3, rs1057910) and *VKORC1* (1173G>A, rs9934438) have been associated with increased major bleeding risk^19, 20^, while a variant of *CYP4F2* (*3, rs2108622) has been associated with decreased risk.^6, 18^ However, no studies have evaluated gene-obesity interactions and major bleeding risk.

The primary objective of this analysis is to evaluate the association between BMI and warfarin major bleeding risk. We also conducted exploratory analyses to evaluate interactions between *CYP2C9, VKORC1*, and *CYP4F2* variants, obesity, and major bleeding risk. The results have the potential to enhance understanding about the clinical significance of BMI in warfarin therapy and inform clinical strategies to mitigate major bleeding risk.

## METHODS

### Study Design

This retrospective case-control study was conducted using data from an existing case–control study among patients receiving warfarin therapy. The parent study (**W**arfarin **I**nvestigation for **S**afety and **H**ealth, or WISH) was designed to evaluate the association between genetic variants that influence warfarin dose requirements and major bleeding risk.^6^ Study participants were recruited from Group Health (GH), a nonprofit integrated health-care system that insures and provides medical care to approximately 600,000 patients in Washington State.^6^ The sample included 265 cases that experienced a major bleeding event while receiving warfarin and 305 similar controls that did not have major bleeding. For this analysis, the primary exposure was obesity and the outcome of interest was major bleeding. Analyses were adjusted for a variety of factors derived from GH automated databases and a 44-item mailed survey that collected supplemental clinical, behavioral, and demographic information.^6^ Additional details regarding cases, controls, warfarin use, genetic testing, and covariate information was included in previous publications.^6, 21^

### Cases

Cases were GH patients 18 years of age or older who had an inpatient diagnosis of a major bleeding event (reference date) between January 1, 2005 and April 1, 2011. A validated *ICD-9* algorithm was used to identify major bleeding events.^22^ Events were classified as “major bleeding” if they were clinically apparent and resulted in hospitalization, hemoglobin decreased >2mg/dl, and/or more than 2 units of packed red blood cells were transfused.^22, 23^ We required cases to be continuously enrolled in GH for at least 1 year prior to index with no evidence of major bleeding events in the year prior to the index date. The date of the bleeding event was set as the index date. Using GH pharmacy records, we required cases to be using warfarin within three days of the bleeding event.

### Controls

Controls were selected using a risk set sampling approach in which patients that met all eligibility criteria above (except major bleeding) were assigned a random index date (date of bleeding event for matched case). The index date was used for collection of information that allowed for the comparison of case and control data from the same time frame of case major bleeding events.

### Warfarin Use

Warfarin use was determined using GH automated pharmacy records during the year prior to the index date. The assessment of warfarin use included drug name, dispensing date, days of supply, and strength. Treatment duration was calculated based on the current episode of warfarin use, characterized as a continuous supply of warfarin and not exceeding 90 gap days. Gap days were calculated using the days’ supply field from dispensing data and multiplying by 1.25 to allow for variable adherence.^6^

### Body Mass Index

BMI was calculated from height and weight data documented in GH electronic medical records (EMR). Height and weight are routinely collected during patient visits and measures most proximal to the index date were used. After calculating BMI in kg/m^2^, WHO BMI classifications were applied: underweight (<18.5), normal weight (18.5–24.9), overweight (25.0–29.9), and obese (>30.0).^24^ These classifications were dichotomized into obese and non-obese for the analyses.

### Clinical, Demographic, and Behavioral Covariates

Clinical and demographic data displayed in [Table 1](#T1) were obtained through the GH automated databases that capture all clinical encounters via EMRs and claims data.

### Table 1.

| Variable | Cases(n=265) | Controls(n=305) | p-value* |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Automated Data Variables |  |  |  |
| Age in Years at Index Date, Mean (SD) | 71.1 (12.7) | 69.5 (11.2) | 0.92 |
|   |  |  |  |
| Duration of Plan Enrollment at Index Date (Years), |   |   |   |
|   |  |  |  |
| Mean (SD) | 15.8 (6.0) | 14.8 (6.3) | 0.91 |
|   |  |  |  |
|   | n (column %) |  |   |
|   |  |  |  |
| Male | 134 (50.6%) | 176 (57.7%) | 0.09 |
|   |  |  |  |
| Body Mass Index (BMI) |   |   | 0.01 |
| Not obese (<30.0 kg/m2) | 140 (53%) | 128 (42%) |   |
| Obese (≥30.0 kg/m2) | 125 (47%) | 177 (58%) |   |
|   |  |  |  |
| Duration of Warfarin Therapy at Index Date |   |   | <0.01 |
| <6 Months | 69 (26.0%) | 54 (17.7%) |   |
| 6 Months to 1 Year | 26 (9.8%) | 24 (7.9%) |   |
| >1 Year | 170 (64.2%) | 227 (74.4%) |   |
|   |  |  |  |
| Comorbidities¥ |   |   |   |
| Cancer | 8 (3.0%) | 14 (4.6%) | 0.32 |
| Diabetes | 58 (21.9%) | 81 (26.6%) | 0.19 |
| Hypertension | 197 (74.3%) | 195 (63.9%) | <0.01 |
| Congestive Heart Failure | 101 (38.1%) | 68 (22.3%) | <0.01 |
|   |  |  |  |
| Charlson Comorbidity Index, Mean (SD) |   |   | 0.07 |
| Score=0 | 84 (31.8%) | 124 (40.8%) |   |
| Score=1 | 70 (26.4%) | 76 (25.0%) |   |
| Score=2+ | 110 (41.7%) | 104 (34.2%) |   |
| Missing | 1 | 1 |   |
|   |  |  |  |
| Self – Report Survey Variables |  |  |  |
|   | n (column %) |  |   |
|   |  |  |  |
| Diagnoses associated with warfarin use |   |   |   |
| Atrial Fibrillation | 89 (33.6%) | 136 (44.6%) | <0.01 |
| DVT | 31 (11.7%) | 42 (13.8%) | 0.45 |
| PE | 27 (10.2%) | 26 (8.5%) | 0.49 |
| Stroke | 27 (10.2%) | 20 (6.6%) | 0.12 |
| Heart Valve Replacement | 54 (20.4%) | 32 (10.5%) | 0.01 |
| Myocardial Infarction | 13 (4.9%) | 17 (5.6%) | 0.71 |
| Joint Replacement | 12 (4.5%) | 12 (3.9%) | 0.72 |
| CABG | 6 (2.3%) | 11 (3.6%) | 0.36 |
| Other | 17 (6.4%) | 23 (7.5%) | 0.61 |
|   |  |  |  |
| Race |   |   | 0.45 |
| American Indian or Alaska Native | 3 (1.2%) | 1 (0.3%) |   |
| Asian | 3 (1.2%) | 6 (2.0%) |   |
| Black/African American | 7 (2.7%) | 5 (1.6%) |   |
| White/Caucasian | 243 (93.5%) | 287 (94.4%) |   |
| Other | 4 (1.5%) | 2 (0.7%) |   |
| Missing | 5 | 4 |   |
|   |  |  |  |
| Care Setting |   |   | 0.12 |
| Anticoagulation Clinic | 115 (46.4%) | 166 (55.1%) |   |
| Primary Care | 86 (34.7%) | 91 (30.2%) |   |
| Cardiologist | 20 (8.1%) | 24 (8.0%) |   |
| Other | 27 (10.9%) | 20 (6.6%) |   |
| Missing | 17 | 4 |   |
| Annual Household Income |   |   | 0.1 |
| <$25,000 | 40 (17.1%) | 46 (16.1%) |   |
| $25,000–$49,999 | 102 (43.6%) | 96 (33.7%) |   |
| $50,000–$74,999 | 45 (18.4%) | 79 (27.7%) |   |
| $75,000–$99,999 | 23 (9.8%) | 33 (11.6%) |   |
| ≥$100,000 | 24 (10.3%) | 31 (10.9%) |   |
| Missing | 31 | 20 |   |

Table 1 Caption: Clinical and demographic characteristics by case-control status of warfarin users in a community setting.

Supplemental information not available from the databases was collected via a 44-item self-report survey completed by all study participants. Of the 702 cases and 702 controls approached for the survey and genetic testing (see below), 265 (38.0%) and 305 (43.9%) participated. Details on the survey were previously described by Roth et al.^6^

### Genetic Testing

A buccal swab was collected from all study participants at the time of the survey via a catch-all mailer (Epicentre, Madison, WI) for analysis of *CYP2C9*2* and **3*, *VKORC1 1173G>A*, and *CYP4F2*3* polymorphisms. The polymorphism detection assays were designed and performed in the Functional Genomics Laboratory, Center for Ecogenetics and Environmental Health at the University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Genotype and allele frequencies for this study population can be found in a previous publication.^6^

### Statistical analyses

Case and control characteristics were compared using χ^2^ tests, Fisher’s exact test for categorical variables and the Student’s t-test for continuous variables following established methods in the literature.^25^ In the primary analysis, we used unadjusted and multivariate logistic regression to estimate the major bleeding odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (95% CI) for obese patients relative to non-obese patients. In multivariate analyses, we adjusted for race (white/other), duration of therapy (continuous), age (continuous), gender, diagnoses related to warfarin use (atrial fibrillation, venous thromboembolism, heart valve replacement, other), regular aspirin use, regular use of NSAIDs, congestive heart failure, and hypertension. These covariates were selected based on patient characteristics previously adjusted for in earlier research studying outcomes in warfarin users.^6, 13, 16^

We also conducted exploratory analyses using multivariate logistic regression models to evaluate the main effects of genetic variants on major bleeding risk and interactions between genotype and obesity. Variants in *CYP2C9 (*2, *3)* and *VKORC1 (1173)* were previously associated with an increased bleeding risk^4, 8, 26^, and *CYP4F2*3* was associated with a decreased bleeding risk.^16^ To reflect these differences and maximize statistical power, interaction analyses used a variable that combined the presence of any *CYP2C9* or *VKORC1* risk variant into a binary variable (*CYP2C9* or *VKORC1* variant), and a separate variable that reflected *CYP4F2*3* status. Similar to previous studies, our analyses grouped heterozygous and homozygous variants in a single “variant” category.^6^ The multivariate logistic regression models adjusted for age at index date (continuous), gender (binary), and race (white/other, binary). We did not use Bonferroni correction for testing significance of multiple comparisons.^27^

All statistical analyses were conducted using the STATA Statistical Package, Version 13.0 (STATA, Austin, TX). This study was approved by the GH institutional review board.

## RESULTS

### Study Sample Characteristics

Among cases and controls, average age was 71 and 70 years, and 51% and 58% were male, respectively. As shown in [Table 1](#T1), the only statistically significant differences between cases and controls were in proportion with a hypertension or congestive heart failure diagnosis in their medical records, and self-reported heart valve replacement and atrial fibrillation indication for warfarin.

### Primary Analysis of Obesity and Major Bleeding Risk

In unadjusted analyses, obesity; history of deep vein thrombosis, congestive heart failure, or hypertension diagnosis; regular aspirin use or NSAID use; and warfarin treatment duration <1 year each had statistically significant associations with major bleeding ([Table 2](#T2)). In multivariate analysis, only obesity, gender, and history of congestive heart failure diagnosis remained significantly associated with major bleeding risk. Obesity was associated with decreased major bleeding risk in unadjusted (OR=0.61, 95% CI=0.42–0.88) and multivariate (OR=0.60; 95% CI=0.39–0.92) logistic regression models ([Table 2](#T2)).

### Table 2.

| Comparison | Odds Ratio (95% Confidence Interval) |
| --- | --- |
| Caucasian vs. Other Race | 0.69 (0.36–1.32) |
| <1 Year Warfarin Treatment Duration vs. ≥1 Year Warfarin Treatment Duration | 1.84 (1.20–2.81) |
| Age at index date | 1.01 (0.99–1.03) |
| Male vs. Female | 0.75 (0.54–1.04) |
| Body Mass Index ≥30 vs. Body Mass Index <30 | 0.61 (0.42–0.88) |
| Warfarin Indication |   |
| Atrial fibrillation vs. Other Indications | 0.97 (0.68–1.37) |
| Deep vein thrombosis vs. Other Indications | 1.76 (1.15–2.68) |
| Heart valve replacement vs. Other Indications | 3.13 (0.82–11.9) |
| Regular Aspirin Use vs. No Regular Aspirin Use | 1.81 (1.21–2.69) |
| Regular NSAID Use vs. No Regular NSAID Use | 2.51 (1.24–5.12) |
| Congestive Heart Failure Diagnosis vs. No Congestive Heart Failure Diagnosis | 2.15 (1.49–3.10) |
| Hypertension Diagnosis vs. No Hypertension Diagnosis | 1.63 (1.14–2.35) |

Table 2 Caption: Unadjusted analysis for association of risk factors on the risk of major bleeding in warfarin therapy patients in a community setting

In multivariate models stratified by duration of warfarin use, the major bleeding odds ratio for obese vs. non-obese patients was 0.56 (95% CI: 0.35–0.90) in those with more than 1-year of warfarin use, and 0.78 (95% CI: 0.40–1.54) in those with less than 1-year of warfarin use. A formal test of interaction between obesity and duration of warfarin use was non-significant (p=0.72).

### Exploratory Analyses of Genetic Status, Obesity, and Major Bleeding Risk

Odds ratios and their respective confidence intervals are presented for the association between genotype and major bleeding risk in strata of obesity and no obesity. Similarly, we present results for the association between obesity and major bleeding risk in strata of genotype status ([Table 4](#T4)). The interaction between *CYP2C9/VKORC1* variant status and obesity on the risk of major bleeding was not statistically significant (p=0.59). Point estimates suggest that the joint effect of obesity is more protective in those patients who were wild type for *CYP2C9* or *VKORC1*, but the result was not statistically significant. However, the interaction between *CYP4F2* variant status and obesity on the risk of major bleeding was statistically significant (p=0.049). The OR for major bleeding among obese persons compared to non-obese was 0.98 (95% CI: 0.59–1.62) for those with the *CYP4F2*3* variant and 0.49 (95% CI: 0.30–0.79) for those who were wild type *CYP4F2*3*. The OR for major bleeding among patients with the *CYP4F2*3* variant compared to patients who were wild type was 0.98 (95% CI: 0.61–1.56) and 0.49 (95% CI: 0.30–0.81) for obese and non-obese, respectively. The significant gene-environment interaction estimated between *CYP4F2*3* genotype and obesity on major bleeding risk would not hold its statistical significance to Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons indicating the null hypothesis of no interaction might really be true, and the statistically significant result might be due to chance.

### Table 4.

|   | Multivariate model*Odds Ratio (95% CI) |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Risk factors | Obese | Non-obese | OR for obese vs. non-obese within strata of genotype |
| CYP2C9 or VKORC1 variant present | 0.71 (0.41–1.24) | 1.01 (0.58–1.78) | 0.70 (0.46–1.06) |
| CYP2C9 or VKORC1 wild type | 0.56 (0.29–1.10) | Reference | 0.56 (0.29–1.10) |
| OR for CYP2C9/VKORC1 variant present vs. wild type within strata of obesity | 1.26 (0.74–2.14) | 1.01 (0.58–1.78) |   |
| CYP4F2*3 variant present | 0.48 (0.30–0.77) | 0.49 (0.30–0.81) | 0.98 (0.59–1.62) |
| CYP4F2*3 wild type | 0.49 (0.30–0.79) | Reference | 0.49 (0.30–0.79) |
| OR for CYP4F2*3 variant present vs. wild type within strata of obesity | 0.98 (0.61–1.56) | 0.49 (0.30–0.81) |   |

Table 4 Caption: Interactions Between Gene and Obesity on Risk of Major Bleeding in Warfarin Users

## DISCUSSION

We conducted a case-control study to investigate the association between body mass index and the risk of major bleeding in patients receiving warfarin in a community setting. We found that obese (BMI ≥ 30.0 kg/m^2^) warfarin users had a statistically significant 40% reduction in major bleeding risk compared to non-obese warfarin users.

This study is the first to show an inverse obesity-bleeding association among warfarin users in a community setting. The results are corroborated by previous evidence demonstrating reduced warfarin benefit (evidenced by altered pharmacokinetic properties associated with warfarin clearance and volume of distribution) and an increased time to achieve therapeutic anticoagulation levels in obese patients indicating sub-therapeutic dosing that may be associated with major bleeding risk.^10, 11^ These studies were relatively small and limited by not adjusting for medications that may interact with warfarin, both of which are addressed in our study. One recent study found an increased bleeding risk in obese individuals taking warfarin, which contrasts our findings; however, that study was conducted at an anticoagulation clinic with a retrospective cohort design, analyzing a smaller number of bleeds, greatly diminishing the statistical power, and, unlike in our analysis, they did not control for key co-morbidity risk factors in their analysis.^28^ Further, they included any type of bleed (minor or major) compared to only major bleeds used in our study.

Our findings suggest that BMI is an important clinical factor in assessing and managing anticoagulation therapy. This could be attributable to obese patients receiving warfarin doses that are not personalized to their weight, or it could be due to not adjusting the dose to account for long-term weight gain. Future studies should explore these potential mechanisms, and clinicians should carefully consider BMI when determining warfarin doses.^11^

While results are exploratory, this was the first study to look at the interaction between genetic variants and obesity on bleeding risk. While no interaction was found between *CYP2C9/VKORC1* genotype and obesity on major bleeding risk, obesity appeared protective among patients with *CYP4F2* wild type but not patients with the variant. We also observed the *CYP4F2* variant to be protective among those without obesity but not among those with obesity. These findings suggest the protective association of the *CYP4F2*3* variant^6^ and obesity on major bleeding are lessened when both are present. Future studies are needed to validate these results, and additional functional studies are needed to better understand the potential biological rationale for this interaction in order to reconcile the differences of the bleeding risk associations from each factor separately. The findings may also provide evidence for understanding the variability in published findings for associations between pharmacogenomic markers and the risk of major bleeding events in obese warfarin patients. Additional exploration into protective associations against major bleeding risk that may result from being obese and known pharmacogenetic variants that increase risk should follow, since individuals can carry multiple pharmacogenetic variants that confer conflicting major bleeding risks when considered independently.

The study has several limitations. First, we dichotomized BMI into obese and non-obese groups, rather than analyzing finer BMI groupings. This approach was necessary due to small numbers of patients in underweight and normal weight categories, which would have limited statistical power. If heterogeneous effects actually exist across the finer groupings, this could impact the confidence intervals by being too narrow. Being underweight, overweight, and obese are associated with additional individual health risks, but delineating finer BMI groupings is not necessary to inform major bleeding risk. The results on the interaction between obesity and *CYP4F2*3* genotype were exploratory and any associations may be due to chance, as statistical significance would not hold under Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons.^27^ The size and demographic of the study’s sample creates generalizability limitations. Though this was the largest study of warfarin pharmacogenomics and major bleeding conducted to date, the sample size of 570 patients still limits the power to be able to detect genetic interactions. Furthermore, most participants were Caucasian (overall 94%) and received care in the Seattle metropolitan region, therefore potentially limiting generalizability. Research including diverse groups of warfarin users is needed to determine whether these associations hold in alternative populations and settings.

### Conclusion

Obese patients receiving warfarin in a community setting had 40% lower risk of major bleeding relative to non-obese patients. The results are consistent with prior studies demonstrating increased therapeutic dose needs in obese anticoagulation patients. Our findings provide an initial evidence base to support more nuanced investigations of the impact of BMI on major bleeding risk in the future. Although the results indicated reduced bleeding in obese warfarin users, the study did not measure thromboembolic events. Evidence suggests that obesity may predispose to venous thromboembolism, which can be of concern to obese warfarin users.^10^ The harm in increased risk of clotting events should be explored further. Future research should investigate obesity and additional genetic variations on major bleeding risk and explore the mechanisms for potential gene-environment interaction effects.

|   |   |   | Unadjusted Model |  | Adjusted Model* |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Exposure | CasesN=265 | ControlsN=305 | OR | 95% CI | OR | 95% CI |
|   | n (%) |  |   |  |   |  |
| Non-obese (BMI<30kg/m2) | 140 (52.8) | 128 (42.0) | REF |  | REF |  |
| Obese (BMI≥30 kg/m2) | 125 (47.2) | 177 (58.0) | 0.61 | 0.42–0.88 | 0.60 | 0.39 – 0.92 |

Table Caption: Association between obesity and the risk of major bleeding among warfarin therapy patients in a community setting.

We believe this is the first study to investigate the association between BMI and major bleeding risk on warfarin in a community setting (i.e., not conducted at an academic anticoagulation clinic), as well as the first to evaluate BMI interactions with key genetic risk factors. Our results will be of particular interest to your readership because we demonstrate that obese patients on warfarin are at decreased major bleeding risk—a finding that suggests BMI is an important clinical factor in the assessment and management of anticoagulation therapy. Additionally, our study demonstrated a potentially important gene-environment interaction between *CYP4F2* variants and BMI on risk of major bleeding that warrants additional evaluation in future studies.

We believe this is the first study to investigate the association between BMI and major bleeding risk on warfarin in a community setting (i.e., not conducted at an academic anticoagulation clinic), as well as the first to evaluate BMI interactions with key genetic risk factors. Our results will be of particular interest to your readership because we demonstrate that obese patients on warfarin are at decreased major bleeding risk—a finding that suggests BMI is an important clinical factor in the assessment and management of anticoagulation therapy. Additionally, our study demonstrated a potentially important gene-environment interaction between *CYP4F2* variants and BMI on risk of major bleeding that warrants additional evaluation in future studies.

## Acknowledgments

This study was supported by grants from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (1UO1 GM092676-01; Thummel K & Burke W, Co-PIs), National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (P30ES007033; Eaton D, PI), Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (1K12HSO22982-1, Sullivan S, PI), and the PhRMA Foundation pre-doctoral fellowship in health outcomes (Roth J). The funding sources had no role in the design or conduct of the study; collection, analysis, and interpretation of the data; preparation or review of the manuscript; or the decision to submit the manuscript for publication. The authors acknowledge Melissa A. Austin for her scientific guidance, contribution to discussions, and providing critical comments to this manuscript.

## Footnotes

## References

1. Deitelzweig S. Care Transitions in Anticoagulation Management for Patients With Atrial Fibrillation: An Emphasis on Safety. The Ochsner Journal. 2013;13:419–427.  [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3776521/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24052775/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=The%20Ochsner%20Journal&title=Care%20Transitions%20in%20Anticoagulation%20Management%20for%20Patients%20With%20Atrial%20Fibrillation:%20An%20Emphasis%20on%20Safety&author=S%20Deitelzweig&volume=13&publication_year=2013&pages=419-427&pmid=24052775&)

2. Fang MC, Go AS, Hylek EM, et al. Age and the Risk of Warfarin-Associated Hemorrhage: The Anticoagulation and Risk Factors In Atrial Fibrillation Study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2006;54:1231–1236. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2006.00828.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-5415.2006.00828.x) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3534958/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16913990/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Am%20Geriatr%20Soc&title=Age%20and%20the%20Risk%20of%20Warfarin-Associated%20Hemorrhage:%20The%20Anticoagulation%20and%20Risk%20Factors%20In%20Atrial%20Fibrillation%20Study&author=MC%20Fang&author=AS%20Go&author=EM%20Hylek&volume=54&publication_year=2006&pages=1231-1236&pmid=16913990&doi=10.1111/j.1532-5415.2006.00828.x&)

3. Han Z-H, Ren X-J, Wang Y. Anticoagulation management of patients with long-term warfarin therapy after valve replacement during the perioperative period of pacemaker implantation. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2013;6:594–598.  [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3731193/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23936600/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int%20J%20Clin%20Exp%20Med&title=Anticoagulation%20management%20of%20patients%20with%20long-term%20warfarin%20therapy%20after%20valve%20replacement%20during%20the%20perioperative%20period%20of%20pacemaker%20implantation&author=Z-H%20Han&author=X-J%20Ren&author=Y%20Wang&volume=6&publication_year=2013&pages=594-598&pmid=23936600&)

4. Kamali F, Wynne H. Pharmacogenetics of Warfarin. Annual Review of Medicine. 2010;61:63–75. doi: 10.1146/annurev.med.070808.170037.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.med.070808.170037) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19686083/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Annual%20Review%20of%20Medicine&title=Pharmacogenetics%20of%20Warfarin&author=F%20Kamali&author=H%20Wynne&volume=61&publication_year=2010&pages=63-75&pmid=19686083&doi=10.1146/annurev.med.070808.170037&)

5. Moyer TP, O’Kane DJ, Baudhuin LM, et al. Warfarin Sensitivity Genotyping: A Review of the Literature and Summary of Patient Experience. Mayo Clin Proc. 2009;84:1079–1094. doi: 10.4065/mcp.2009.0278.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.4065/mcp.2009.0278) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2787394/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19955245/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mayo%20Clin%20Proc&title=Warfarin%20Sensitivity%20Genotyping:%20A%20Review%20of%20the%20Literature%20and%20Summary%20of%20Patient%20Experience&author=TP%20Moyer&author=DJ%20O%E2%80%99Kane&author=LM%20Baudhuin&volume=84&publication_year=2009&pages=1079-1094&pmid=19955245&doi=10.4065/mcp.2009.0278&)

6. Roth J, Boudreau D, Fujii M, et al. Genetic Risk Factors for Major Bleeding in Patients Treated With Warfarin in a Community Setting. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics. 2014;95:636–643. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2014.26.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/clpt.2014.26) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4067047/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24503627/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clinical%20Pharmacology%20&%20Therapeutics&title=Genetic%20Risk%20Factors%20for%20Major%20Bleeding%20in%20Patients%20Treated%20With%20Warfarin%20in%20a%20Community%20Setting&author=J%20Roth&author=D%20Boudreau&author=M%20Fujii&volume=95&publication_year=2014&pages=636-643&pmid=24503627&doi=10.1038/clpt.2014.26&)

7. Limdi NA, Wiener H, Goldstein JA, Acton RT, Beasley TM. Influence of CYP2C9 and VKORC1 on warfarin response during initiation of therapy. Blood Cells, Molecules, and Diseases. 2009;43:119–128. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2009.01.019.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcmd.2009.01.019) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2789741/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19297219/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Blood%20Cells,%20Molecules,%20and%20Diseases&title=Influence%20of%20CYP2C9%20and%20VKORC1%20on%20warfarin%20response%20during%20initiation%20of%20therapy&author=NA%20Limdi&author=H%20Wiener&author=JA%20Goldstein&author=RT%20Acton&author=TM%20Beasley&volume=43&publication_year=2009&pages=119-128&pmid=19297219&doi=10.1016/j.bcmd.2009.01.019&)

8. Meckley LM, Wittkowsky AK, Rieder MJ, Rettie AE, Veenstra DL. An analysis of the relative effects of VKORC1 and CYP2C9 variants on anticoagulation related outcomes in warfarin-treated patients. Thromb Haemost. 2008;100:229–239.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18690342/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Thromb%20Haemost&title=An%20analysis%20of%20the%20relative%20effects%20of%20VKORC1%20and%20CYP2C9%20variants%20on%20anticoagulation%20related%20outcomes%20in%20warfarin-treated%20patients&author=LM%20Meckley&author=AK%20Wittkowsky&author=MJ%20Rieder&author=AE%20Rettie&author=DL%20Veenstra&volume=100&publication_year=2008&pages=229-239&pmid=18690342&)

9. Mercaldi CJ, Ciarametaro M, Hahn B, et al. Cost Efficiency of Anticoagulation With Warfarin to Prevent Stroke in Medicare Beneficiaries With Nonvalvular Atrial Fibrillation. Stroke. 2011;42:112–118. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.592907.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.592907) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21148442/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Stroke&title=Cost%20Efficiency%20of%20Anticoagulation%20With%20Warfarin%20to%20Prevent%20Stroke%20in%20Medicare%20Beneficiaries%20With%20Nonvalvular%20Atrial%20Fibrillation&author=CJ%20Mercaldi&author=M%20Ciarametaro&author=B%20Hahn&volume=42&publication_year=2011&pages=112-118&pmid=21148442&doi=10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.592907&)

10. Allman-Farinelli MA. Obesity and Venous Thrombosis: A Review. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2011;37:903–907. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1297369.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0031-1297369) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22198855/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Semin%20Thromb%20Hemost&title=Obesity%20and%20Venous%20Thrombosis:%20A%20Review&author=MA%20Allman-Farinelli&volume=37&publication_year=2011&pages=903-907&pmid=22198855&doi=10.1055/s-0031-1297369&)

11. Patel JP, Roberts LN, Arya R. Anticoagulating obese patients in the modern era. British Journal of Haematology. 2011;155:137–149. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2011.08826.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2141.2011.08826.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21848880/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=British%20Journal%20of%20Haematology&title=Anticoagulating%20obese%20patients%20in%20the%20modern%20era&author=JP%20Patel&author=LN%20Roberts&author=R%20Arya&volume=155&publication_year=2011&pages=137-149&pmid=21848880&doi=10.1111/j.1365-2141.2011.08826.x&)

12. Mueller JA, Patel T, Halawa A, Dumitrascu A, Dawson NL. Warfarin dosing and body mass index. Ann Pharmacother. 2014;48:584–588. doi: 10.1177/1060028013517541.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1177/1060028013517541) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24558184/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann%20Pharmacother&title=Warfarin%20dosing%20and%20body%20mass%20index&author=JA%20Mueller&author=T%20Patel&author=A%20Halawa&author=A%20Dumitrascu&author=NL%20Dawson&volume=48&publication_year=2014&pages=584-588&pmid=24558184&doi=10.1177/1060028013517541&)

13. Meyer zu Schwabedissen C, Mevissen V, Schmitz F, et al. Obesity is associated with a slower response to initial phenprocoumon therapy whereas CYP2C9 genotypes. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2006;62:713–720. doi: 10.1007/s00228-006-0158-3.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00228-006-0158-3) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16847664/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20J%20Clin%20Pharmacol&title=Obesity%20is%20associated%20with%20a%20slower%20response%20to%20initial%20phenprocoumon%20therapy%20whereas%20CYP2C9%20genotypes&author=C%20Meyer%20zu%20Schwabedissen&author=V%20Mevissen&author=F%20Schmitz&volume=62&publication_year=2006&pages=713-720&pmid=16847664&doi=10.1007/s00228-006-0158-3&)

14. Tokumaru S, Izumi K, Nakagawa K. Obesity increases risk of anticoagulation reversal failure with prothrombin complex concentrate in those with intracranial hemorrhage. International Journal of Neuroscience. 2014 doi: 10.3109/00207454.2014.993034.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3109/00207454.2014.993034) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25430740/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=International%20Journal%20of%20Neuroscience&title=Obesity%20increases%20risk%20of%20anticoagulation%20reversal%20failure%20with%20prothrombin%20complex%20concentrate%20in%20those%20with%20intracranial%20hemorrhage&author=S%20Tokumaru&author=K%20Izumi&author=K%20Nakagawa&publication_year=2014&pmid=25430740&doi=10.3109/00207454.2014.993034&)

15. Caldwell MD, Awad T, Johnson JA, et al. CYP4F2 genetic variant alters required warfarin dose. Blood. 2008;111:4106–4112. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-11-122010.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2007-11-122010) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2288721/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18250228/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Blood&title=CYP4F2%20genetic%20variant%20alters%20required%20warfarin%20dose&author=MD%20Caldwell&author=T%20Awad&author=JA%20Johnson&volume=111&publication_year=2008&pages=4106-4112&pmid=18250228&doi=10.1182/blood-2007-11-122010&)

16. Higashi MK, DL V, LM K, et al. Association between CYP2C9 genetic variants and anticoagulation-related outcomes during warfarin therapy. JAMA. 2002;287:1690–1698. doi: 10.1001/jama.287.13.1690.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.287.13.1690) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11926893/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=JAMA&title=Association%20between%20CYP2C9%20genetic%20variants%20and%20anticoagulation-related%20outcomes%20during%20warfarin%20therapy&author=MK%20Higashi&author=V%20DL&author=K%20LM&volume=287&publication_year=2002&pages=1690-1698&pmid=11926893&doi=10.1001/jama.287.13.1690&)

17. Limdi NA, Veenstra DL. Warfarin Pharmacogenetics. Pharmacotherapy. 2008;28:1084–1097. doi: 10.1592/phco.28.9.1084.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1592/phco.28.9.1084) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2756787/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18752379/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacotherapy&title=Warfarin%20Pharmacogenetics&author=NA%20Limdi&author=DL%20Veenstra&volume=28&publication_year=2008&pages=1084-1097&pmid=18752379&doi=10.1592/phco.28.9.1084&)

18. Shendre A, Brown TM, Liu N, et al. Race-specific influence of CYP4F2 on dose and risk of hemorrhage among warfarin users. Pharmacotherapy: The Journal of Human Pharmacology and Drug Therapy. 2016 doi: 10.1002/phar.1717.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/phar.1717) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4803610/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26877068/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacotherapy:%20The%20Journal%20of%20Human%20Pharmacology%20and%20Drug%20Therapy&title=Race-specific%20influence%20of%20CYP4F2%20on%20dose%20and%20risk%20of%20hemorrhage%20among%20warfarin%20users&author=A%20Shendre&author=TM%20Brown&author=N%20Liu&publication_year=2016&pmid=26877068&doi=10.1002/phar.1717&)

19. Tomek A, Ma’oška Vc, Kolářová T, et al. The Bleeding Risk during Warfarin Therapy Is Associated with the Number of Variant Alleles of CYP2C9 and VKORC1 Genes. Cardiology. 2013;125:182–191. doi: 10.1159/000350407.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1159/000350407) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23774101/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cardiology&title=The%20Bleeding%20Risk%20during%20Warfarin%20Therapy%20Is%20Associated%20with%20the%20Number%20of%20Variant%20Alleles%20of%20CYP2C9%20and%20VKORC1%20Genes&author=A%20Tomek&author=Vc%20Ma%E2%80%99o%C5%A1ka&author=T%20Kol%C3%A1%C5%99ov%C3%A1&volume=125&publication_year=2013&pages=182-191&pmid=23774101&doi=10.1159/000350407&)

20. Dean L. Medical Genetics Summaries. Bethesda (MD): National Center for Biotechnology Information; 2012. Warfarin Therapy and the Genotypes CYP2C9 and VKORC1.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Medical%20Genetics%20Summaries&author=L%20Dean&publication_year=2012&)

21. Roth JA, Bradley K, Thummel KE, Veenstra DL, Boudreau D. Alcohol misuse, genetics, and major bleeding among warfarin therapy patients in a community setting. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2015;24:619–627. doi: 10.1002/pds.3769.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/pds.3769) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4478047/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25858232/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacoepidemiol%20Drug%20Saf&title=Alcohol%20misuse,%20genetics,%20and%20major%20bleeding%20among%20warfarin%20therapy%20patients%20in%20a%20community%20setting&author=JA%20Roth&author=K%20Bradley&author=KE%20Thummel&author=DL%20Veenstra&author=D%20Boudreau&volume=24&publication_year=2015&pages=619-627&pmid=25858232&doi=10.1002/pds.3769&)

22. Arnason T, Wells PS, van Walraven C, Forster AJ. Accuracy of coding for possible warfarin complications in hospital discharge abstracts. Thromb Res. 2006;118:253–262. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2005.06.015.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.thromres.2005.06.015) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16081144/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Thromb%20Res&title=Accuracy%20of%20coding%20for%20possible%20warfarin%20complications%20in%20hospital%20discharge%20abstracts&author=T%20Arnason&author=PS%20Wells&author=C%20van%20Walraven&author=AJ%20Forster&volume=118&publication_year=2006&pages=253-262&pmid=16081144&doi=10.1016/j.thromres.2005.06.015&)

23. White R, Beyth R, Zhou H, Romano P. Major bleeding after hospitalization for deep-venous thrombosis. Am J Med. 1999;107:414–424. doi: 10.1016/s0002-9343(99)00267-3.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0002-9343(99)00267-3) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10569295/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Med&title=Major%20bleeding%20after%20hospitalization%20for%20deep-venous%20thrombosis&author=R%20White&author=R%20Beyth&author=H%20Zhou&author=P%20Romano&volume=107&publication_year=1999&pages=414-424&pmid=10569295&doi=10.1016/s0002-9343(99)00267-3&)

24. WHO. World Health Organization (WHO): Global Database on Body Mass Index. Retrieved April 19, 2014 from http://apps.who.int/bmi/index.jsp?introPage=intro_3.html.  [http://apps.who.int/bmi/index.jsp?introPage=intro_3.html](http://apps.who.int/bmi/index.jsp?introPage=intro_3.html)

25. Hylek EMHHS SJ, Sheehan MA, Singer DE. Acetaminophen and Other Risk Factors for Excessive Warfarin Anticoagulation. JAMA. 279:657–662. doi: 10.1001/jama.279.9.657.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.279.9.657) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9496982/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=JAMA&title=Acetaminophen%20and%20Other%20Risk%20Factors%20for%20Excessive%20Warfarin%20Anticoagulation&author=SJ%20Hylek%20EMHHS&author=MA%20Sheehan&author=DE%20Singer&volume=279&pages=657-662&pmid=9496982&doi=10.1001/jama.279.9.657&)

26. Lindh JD, Lundgren S, Holm L, Alfredsson L, Rane A. Several-fold increase in risk of overanticoagulation by CYP2C9 mutations. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics. 2005;78:540–550. doi: 10.1016/j.clpt.2005.08.006.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clpt.2005.08.006) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16321620/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clinical%20Pharmacology%20&%20Therapeutics&title=Several-fold%20increase%20in%20risk%20of%20overanticoagulation%20by%20CYP2C9%20mutations&author=JD%20Lindh&author=S%20Lundgren&author=L%20Holm&author=L%20Alfredsson&author=A%20Rane&volume=78&publication_year=2005&pages=540-550&pmid=16321620&doi=10.1016/j.clpt.2005.08.006&)

27. Simes R. An improved Bonferroni procedure for multiple tests of significance. Biometrika. 1986;73:751–754.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biometrika&title=An%20improved%20Bonferroni%20procedure%20for%20multiple%20tests%20of%20significance&author=R%20Simes&volume=73&publication_year=1986&pages=751-754&)

28. Ogunsua A, Touray S, Lui J, Ip T, Escobar J, Gore J. Body mass index predicts major bleeding risks in patients. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2015:494–498. doi: 10.1007/s11239-015-1226-2.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11239-015-1226-2) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26076985/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Thromb%20Thrombolysis&title=Body%20mass%20index%20predicts%20major%20bleeding%20risks%20in%20patients&author=A%20Ogunsua&author=S%20Touray&author=J%20Lui&author=T%20Ip&author=J%20Escobar&publication_year=2015&pages=494-498&pmid=26076985&doi=10.1007/s11239-015-1226-2&)
