# Race or Genetic Makeup for HCV Treatment Decisions?

## Metadata
**Authors:** Thomas R O’Brien, Shyam Kottilil, Jordan J Feld, Timothy R Morgan, Ruth M Pfeiffer
**Journal:** Hepatology (Baltimore, Md.)
**Date:** 2017 Apr 18
**DOI:** [10.1002/hep.29057](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.29057)
**PMID:** 28100007
**PMCID:** PMC5444941
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5444941/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5444941/pdf/nihms845066.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5444941/pdf/nihms845066.pdf)

## To the Editor

Examining data from the VA healthcare system, Su et al([1](#R1)) report high overall response rates with direct-acting antiviral regimens for hepatitis C, but also that 8 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir was less effective in black patients than whites. They suggest 8-week treatment is contraindicated in black patients.

Rather than race, it is preferable to use an individual’s genetic makeup as the basis for clinical decisions. *IFNL4* genotypes are strongly associated with spontaneous HCV clearance and response to interferon-α treatment for hepatitis C; higher frequencies of unfavorable *IFNL4* alleles in blacks explained racial differences in those outcomes([2](#R2)). *IFNL4* genotype may also explain lower response to ledipasvir/sofosbuvir in black patients.

Previously, we showed that *IFNL4* rs12979860 (‘IL28B’) genotype was associated with relapse after 8-week therapy with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir in ION-3 ([3](#R3)). Here we expand that analysis to include published data from two other treatment groups with at least 10 patients who suffered relapse after receiving ledipasvir/sofosbuvir in phase III trials: ION-4 (HCV/HIV co-infected; 12-week treatment)([4](#R4)) and seven pooled clinical trials of patients with compensated cirrhosis (12-week treatment)([5](#R5)). Full rs12979860 genotype data were published for ION-3 and ION-4 ([Table 1](#T1)) with relapse rates of 0–2% for rs12979860-CC genotype compared to 9–10% for rs12979860-TT. Combining those studies reveals a highly significant association across genotype categories (p_trend_= 0.0002); patients with rs12979860-TT genotype were ~4.5 times more likely to relapse than those with rs12979860-CC. For the cirrhotic patients, data on all three genotype categories were not published, however, rs12979860-CC patients had a 1.2% relapse rate ([Table 1](#T1)).

### Table 1.

| Study (Relapses / Total) | ION-3 (20 / 423) |  | ION-4 (10 / 322) |  | ION-3 and ION-4 Combined** |  |  | Cirrhosis (15 / 307) |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   | Relapse | p-value | Relapse | p-value | RR | 95% CI | p-value | Relapse | p-value |
| IFNL4 rs12979860 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| CC | 1.8% |   | 0.0% |   |   |   |   | 1.2% |   |
| CT | 4.9% |   | 1.6% |   | 2.74 | 0.74–10.17 |   | 5.8%+ |   |
| TT | 9.1% | 0.03* | 10.3% | 0.001* | 4.58 | 1.26–16.56 | 0.0002* |   |   |

Table 1 Caption: Proportions of patients who suffered virological relapse in response to treatment with ledipasvir/sofosbuvir, by IFNL4 rs12979860 genotype.

Our analysis is limited because individual patient data were unavailable. Also, although rs12979860 marks the functional *IFNL4*-ΔG/TT variant, the latter is a better predictor of treatment response, especially in black patients([2](#R2)). Therefore, we may have underestimated the association between *IFNL4* genotype and relapse.

Individual level data from populations of diverse racial composition are needed to fully explore relationships between *IFNL4* genotype, race and treatment response. With its large number of HCV-infected patients, the VA healthcare system could address this important question.

## Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health (National Cancer Institute, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics). The content of this publication does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the Department of Health and Human Services, nor does mention of trade names, commercial products, or organizations imply endorsement by the U.S. Government.

T.R.O’B. is an inventor on patent applications filed by the National Cancer Institute for the *IFNL4*-ΔG/TT (rs368234815) genotype-based test. J.F.F. consults or received grants from Abbott, AbbVie, Gilead, Janssen, Merck and Regulus. T.R.M. has received research grants from AbbVie, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Gilead, Merck and Roche.

## Footnotes

## References

1. Su F, Green PK, Berry K, Ioannou GN. The association between race/ethnicity and the effectiveness of direct antiviral agents for hepatitis C virus infection. Hepatology. 2016 doi: 10.1002/hep.28901.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.28901) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6535089/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27775854/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hepatology&title=The%20association%20between%20race/ethnicity%20and%20the%20effectiveness%20of%20direct%20antiviral%20agents%20for%20hepatitis%20C%20virus%20infection&author=F%20Su&author=PK%20Green&author=K%20Berry&author=GN%20Ioannou&publication_year=2016&pmid=27775854&doi=10.1002/hep.28901&)

2. Prokunina-Olsson L, Muchmore B, Tang W, Pfeiffer RM, Park H, Dickensheets H, Hergott D, et al. A variant upstream of IFNL3 (IL28B) creating a new interferon gene IFNL4 is associated with impaired clearance of hepatitis C virus. Nat Genet. 2013;45:164–171. doi: 10.1038/ng.2521.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2521) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3793390/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23291588/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=A%20variant%20upstream%20of%20IFNL3%20(IL28B)%20creating%20a%20new%20interferon%20gene%20IFNL4%20is%20associated%20with%20impaired%20clearance%20of%20hepatitis%20C%20virus&author=L%20Prokunina-Olsson&author=B%20Muchmore&author=W%20Tang&author=RM%20Pfeiffer&author=H%20Park&volume=45&publication_year=2013&pages=164-171&pmid=23291588&doi=10.1038/ng.2521&)

3. O’Brien TR, Lang Kuhs KA, Pfeiffer RM. Subgroup differences in response to 8 weeks of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir for chronic hepatitis C. Open Forum Infectious Diseases. 2014;1 doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofu110.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/ofid/ofu110) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4324232/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25734178/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Open%20Forum%20Infectious%20Diseases&title=Subgroup%20differences%20in%20response%20to%208%20weeks%20of%20ledipasvir/sofosbuvir%20for%20chronic%20hepatitis%20C&author=TR%20O%E2%80%99Brien&author=KA%20Lang%20Kuhs&author=RM%20Pfeiffer&volume=1&publication_year=2014&pmid=25734178&doi=10.1093/ofid/ofu110&)

4. Naggie S, Cooper C, Saag M, Workowski K, Ruane P, Towner WJ, Marks K, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for HCV in patients coinfected with HIV-1. New England Journal of Medicine. 2015;373:705–713. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1501315.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1501315) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4892372/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26196665/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=New%20England%20Journal%20of%20Medicine&title=Ledipasvir%20and%20sofosbuvir%20for%20HCV%20in%20patients%20coinfected%20with%20HIV-1&author=S%20Naggie&author=C%20Cooper&author=M%20Saag&author=K%20Workowski&author=P%20Ruane&volume=373&publication_year=2015&pages=705-713&pmid=26196665&doi=10.1056/NEJMoa1501315&)

5. Reddy KR, Bourlière M, Sulkowski M, Omata M, Zeuzem S, Feld JJ, Lawitz E, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir in patients with genotype 1 hepatitis C virus infection and compensated cirrhosis: An integrated safety and efficacy analysis. Hepatology. 2015;62:79–86. doi: 10.1002/hep.27826.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.27826) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25846144/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hepatology&title=Ledipasvir%20and%20sofosbuvir%20in%20patients%20with%20genotype%201%20hepatitis%20C%20virus%20infection%20and%20compensated%20cirrhosis:%20An%20integrated%20safety%20and%20efficacy%20analysis&author=KR%20Reddy&author=M%20Bourli%C3%A8re&author=M%20Sulkowski&author=M%20Omata&author=S%20Zeuzem&volume=62&publication_year=2015&pages=79-86&pmid=25846144&doi=10.1002/hep.27826&)
