# Integrative genomic analysis of methylphenidate response in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder

## Metadata
**Authors:** Mireia Pagerols, Vanesa Richarte, Cristina Sánchez-Mora, Paula Rovira, María Soler Artigas, Iris Garcia-Martínez, Eva Calvo-Sánchez, Montse Corrales, Bruna Santos da Silva, Nina Roth Mota, Marcelo Moraes Victor, Luis Augusto Rohde, Eugenio Horacio Grevet, Claiton Henrique Dotto Bau, Bru Cormand, Miguel Casas, Josep Antoni Ramos-Quiroga, Marta Ribasés
**Journal:** Scientific Reports
**Date:** 2018 Jan 30
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-018-20194-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-20194-7)
**PMID:** 29382897
**PMCID:** PMC5789875
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5789875/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5789875/pdf/41598_2018_Article_20194.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5789875/pdf/41598_2018_Article_20194.pdf)

## Abstract

Methylphenidate (MPH) is the most frequently used pharmacological treatment in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). However, a considerable interindividual variability exists in clinical outcome. Thus, we performed a genome-wide association study of MPH efficacy in 173 ADHD paediatric patients. Although no variant reached genome-wide significance, the set of genes containing single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) nominally associated with MPH response (P < 0.05) was significantly enriched for candidates previously studied in ADHD or treatment outcome. We prioritised the nominally significant SNPs by functional annotation and expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) analysis in human brain, and we identified 33 SNPs tagging cis-eQTL in 32 different loci (referred to as eSNPs and eGenes, respectively). Pathway enrichment analyses revealed an over-representation of genes involved in nervous system development and function among the eGenes. Categories related to neurological diseases, psychological disorders and behaviour were also significantly enriched. We subsequently meta-analysed the association with clinical outcome for the 33 eSNPs across the discovery sample and an independent cohort of 189 ADHD adult patients (target sample) and we detected 15 suggestive signals. Following this comprehensive strategy, our results provide a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms implicated in MPH treatment effects and suggest promising candidates that may encourage future studies.

## Introduction

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by persistent and age-inappropriate symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity and/or impulsivity^1^, which significantly impacts on academic, social, emotional and psychological functioning. With a worldwide prevalence ranging from 5.3 to 7.1% in school-age children and adolescents^2^, ADHD is one of the most common childhood psychiatric conditions and causes high costs to the healthcare system and society^3,4^. Although its aetiology is largely unknown, several family, twin and adoption studies reported heritability estimates around 76%^5^, suggesting a strong genetic component in the pathogenesis of the disorder.

Among the wide variety of pharmacological options available in ADHD treatment, methylphenidate (MPH) is the first-line choice in paediatric patients, given its proved general efficacy in reducing ADHD symptoms and improving neuropsychological performance on executive functions^6,7^. However, a considerable interindividual variability exists in clinical outcome, optimal dosage and duration of effect^8,9^, which may reflect underlying genetic influences.

Most of the pharmacogenetic studies conducted so far in ADHD patients have focused on genes related to the catecholamine neurotransmission, with *SLC6A3* and *DRD4* being the most extensively investigated, since MPH is thought to exert its therapeutic effects through the inhibition of the dopamine and the norepinephrine transporters^10^. Based on this putative mechanism of action, additional genes such as *DRD2*, *DRD5, COMT*, *SLC6A2*, *ADRA2A, TPH2*, *SLC6A4*, *HTR1B*, *HTR2A* and *MAOA*^11^ have been considered plausible candidates that may influence medication response. Nevertheless, a recent review on ADHD pharmacogenetics in childhood reported no consistent effects for dopaminergic and serotoninergic signaling, and suggested neurodevelopmental genes as new promising targets^12^.

Given that candidate gene-based investigations have not reached many compelling results, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) may represent an alternative, hypothesis-free approach to unravel the molecular mechanisms implicated in MPH treatment. To date, only one prior GWAS evaluated the efficacy of a MPH transdermal system in 187 children with ADHD^13^. Although no genome-wide significant associations were found, the metabotropic glutamate receptor 7 (GRM7) and two SNPs within the *SLC6A2* gene showed potential involvement in MPH response. Using that sample, Mick *et al*.^14^ conducted a secondary GWAS of changes in blood pressure after MPH therapy and detected nominal evidence for genes functionally related to blood pressure regulation and other cardiovascular phenotypes, including a SNP in a K^+^-dependent Na^+^/Ca^2+^ exchanger (SLC24A3). Furthermore, despite the fact that GWAS have been useful to identify genetic risk loci for multiple complex conditions, yet the functional effects of the trait-associated variants and the underlying pathological mechanisms remain mainly elusive.

Based on the absence of clear conclusions regarding MPH response raised by previous genetic studies, we undertook a GWAS of MPH efficacy in 173 ADHD paediatric patients and, for the first time to our knowledge, we integrated data from functional annotation, expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) and enrichment analyses to characterise the biological pathways associated with treatment response. Additionally, we performed a polygenic risk score analysis and a meta-analysis across the study sample and an independent population of 189 ADHD adult patients.

## Materials and Methods

### Discovery population

The study sample included 173 ADHD paediatric patients for whom MPH was prescribed. Subjects were required to satisfy full DSM-IV criteria for ADHD, be under 18 years of age, Spanish of Caucasian origin and have never received MPH treatment. Patients with an IQ below 70 or having pervasive developmental disorders were not eligible for the investigation. Additional exclusion criteria included schizophrenia or other psychotic disorders; adoption; sexual or physical abuse; birth weight <1.5 kg; any significant neurological or systemic disease that might explain ADHD symptoms; and clinical contra-indication to MPH. Comorbid oppositional defiant disorder, conduct disorder, depression and anxiety disorders were allowed unless determined to be the primary cause of ADHD symptomatology. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron and all methods were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations. Written informed consent was obtained from parents/caregivers.

### Clinical assessment

Diagnoses of ADHD and comorbidities were established by child psychiatrists blind to patients’ genotypes through the Present and Lifetime version of the Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School-Age Children (K-SADS-PL). Furthermore, families were interviewed with the Clinical Global Impression-Severity scale (CGI-S). Additional information on clinical assessment is available elsewhere^15^.

### Pharmacological intervention

Patients were treated according to the program’s recommendations of initiating treatment with MPH at low to moderate dose and titrating to higher doses until no further clinical improvement or limiting adverse effects were observed. The mean daily dose of MPH prescribed was 1.06 mg/kg (SD = 0.28). Risperidone was the most frequent concomitant drug.

### Treatment outcome

We considered the Clinical Global Impression-Improvement scale (CGI-I)^16^, which ranges from 1 (‘very much improved’) to 7 (‘very much worse’), as the primary outcome measure of treatment success. Those patients rated with a CGI-I score of two points or less after eight weeks of treatment were considered as responders, while the remaining were classified as non-responders.

### Genome-wide association study

Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes by a salting out procedure^17^. A total of 173 samples were genotyped on the Infinium PsychArray-24 BeadChip platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA), which covers 588,628 markers, and processed at the Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard (Cambridge, MA, USA). Pre-imputation quality control and principal components analysis were implemented following the QC and PCA modules from the Ricopili with the default settings ([https://sites.google.com/a/broadinstitute.org/ricopili/](https://sites.google.com/a/broadinstitute.org/ricopili/)). Genotype imputation was performed with the pre-phasing and imputation strategy using the EUR population of the 1,000 Genomes Project Phase 1 dataset as the reference panel ([http://www.1000genomes.org/](http://www.1000genomes.org/)). We assured the accuracy of the imputation data by filtering best-guess genotypes for an info score <0.3. This resulted in a total of 11,051,824 markers eligible for association tests.

Before GWAS analysis, further quality control measures were applied using the PLINK software^18^. Individuals exhibiting high rates of genotype missingness (>98%) were removed, as well as SNPs with low call rate (<0.99), MAF < 0.01 or failing Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium test (P < 1e-06).

Finally, 173 subjects and 3,566,199 variants were tested for association with MPH response through logistic regression under an additive model, which included those clinical variables (i.e., CGI-S baseline scores) and principal components (i.e., PC6) significantly associated with clinical outcome (P ≤ 0.05) as covariates.

### Identification of candidate causal SNPs

Among the SNPs showing nominal association with treatment outcome (P < 0.05), we used the genome pipeline of SNPinfo ([http://snpinfo.niehs.nih.gov/](http://snpinfo.niehs.nih.gov/))^19^ to prioritise those that were more likely to affect protein sequence, transcriptional regulation, mRNA splicing or miRNA binding based on functional annotation. GenomePipe parameter values included: GWAS population = CEU; study population = CEU; flanking region = 200,000 bp; GWAS P-value < 0.05; LD threshold = 0.8; and MAF = 0.01 for all prediction methods. Additionally, we combined both the predicted conserved transcription factor-binding sites (TFBS) with the regulatory potential score (RP Score; available at [http://genome.ucsc.edu](http://genome.ucsc.edu)) to improve predictions as suggested in several studies^20–22^.

### Cis-expression quantitative trait loci analysis

*Cis*-eQTL analysis was conducted on 193 neuropathologically normal cortical samples of adult humans from Myers *et al*.^23^. Expression-genotype pairs were extracted after extending the genotyped data by imputation as previously described, and considering a 10 kb window around the untranslated regions. Rank-invariant normalised expression levels were log_10_ transformed and transcripts detected in less than 75% of the samples were discarded from the study. Association tests were performed under a linear model with the MatrixEQTL R Package^24^, including gender, age at death, cortical region, day of expression hybridisation, institute source of sample, post-mortem interval and transcripts detected rate in each sample as covariates.

### Functional and pathway enrichment analysis

The biological functions and pathways related to genes containing at least one SNP nominally associated with both MPH response and human cortical expression levels (referred to as eSNPs) were assessed through the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (IPA) (Ingenuity Systems, Redwood City, CA, USA; [www.ingenuity.com](http://www.ingenuity.com)). IPA was also used to test for over-representation of genes previously studied in either ADHD or treatment outcome. Candidate genes for ADHD or MPH response were selected based on the gene list provided by the ADHDgene database ([http://adhd.psych.ac.cn/index.do](http://adhd.psych.ac.cn/index.do))^25^ and a comprehensive search for published reviews of ADHD genetic and pharmacogenetic studies^11,12,26–31^. Thus, a total of 436 genes were considered (Supplementary Table [S1](#MOESM1)). Fisher’s exact tests, with a Benjamini-Hochberg-adjusted P-value (P_B-H_) < 0.05 as significance threshold, were applied in all analyses. To achieve meaningful statistics and interpretation of the results, we restricted the enrichment analysis to those annotation terms that included ≥2 genes of our dataset.

### Polygenic risk score analysis

We generated polygenic risk scores (PRS) based on the results of the present GWAS using the Polygenic Risk Score software (PRSice)^32^. A logistic regression model was applied to test whether PRS at multiple stepwise P-value thresholds (i.e., P_T_ < 1e-04, P_T_ < 1e-03, P_T_ < 0.05, P_T_ < 0.1, P_T_ < 0.2, P_T_ < 0.3, P_T_ < 0.4, and P_T_ < 0.5) predicted treatment outcome in an independent sample of patients with ADHD (target population). The target population comprised 189 Brazilian adults from the Adult ADHD Outpatient Clinic of the Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, who underwent immediate-release MPH treatment. Diagnoses of ADHD and comorbidities, as well as inclusion/exclusion criteria, were achieved as previously described^33^. The outcome measures of MPH treatment were the CGI-S scale, applied before medication and at least four weeks after its beginning, and the CGI-I scale. Drug response was defined following the criteria used in the discovery sample. Similarly, samples were genotyped and imputed using the same platform, imputation protocol and reference panel. The resulting dataset consisted of 7,304,149 SNPs with an info score >0.6, a genotype call probability >0.8 and a missing rate <0.02.

Potential confounders were included as covariates in the PRS model if they were associated with MPH response (P ≤ 0.05) in the target sample (i.e., CGI-S baseline scores, use of concomitant medication and presence of phobia as comorbid condition), as well as the 10 first principal components to control for population stratification.

### Meta-analysis

The eSNPs nominally associated with MPH response in the discovery sample were meta-analysed across the discovery and the target population used in the PRS analysis by the inverse-variance weighted method. The threshold for significance was set at P ≤ 1.52e-03 under the more conservative Bonferroni correction, taking into account 33 SNPs.

### Data availability

The datasets generated and/or analysed during the current study are not publicly available due to ethics constraints but are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

## Results

### Genome-wide association study in the discovery population

Subjects were predominantly male (84.4%), with an average age at assessment of 9.59 (SD = 2.91) years (range 5–17). One hundred and thirty-one participants (75.7%) met DSM-IV criteria for ADHD-combined subtype, 37 (21.4%) had ADHD-inattentive subtype and 5 (2.9%) were diagnosed with ADHD-hyperactive-impulsive subtype. Comorbid disorders were present in a modest number of patients (22.5%), the main ones being disabilities in reading and writing (12.7%), oppositional defiant disorder (5.8%) and tic disorders (1.7%). One hundred and forty-one subjects (81.5%) responded favourably to treatment according to the CGI-I scale, while 32 (18.5%) failed to show a clinical response to MPH. Responders and non-responders were comparable with regard to age, sex, ADHD subtype, comorbidity, use of concomitant medication, MPH dose and drug formulation (P > 0.05). There were significant differences, however, in the severity of symptoms as assessed by the CGI-S scale (P < 1e-03), with children resistant to MPH scoring higher at the baseline evaluation than children showing clinical improvement (Supplementary Table [S2](#MOESM1)).

No variant reached genome-wide significance (P < 5e-08). However, the set of 4,709 genes containing SNPs nominally associated with MPH response (P < 0.05; Supplementary Table [S3](#MOESM2)) was significantly enriched for candidates previously studied in ADHD or treatment outcome, with 199 out of 436 being present in this category (ratio = 0.46; P_B-H_ = 1.56e-31).

### Identification of candidate causal SNPs and cis-expression quantitative trait loci analysis

Considering these results, we prioritised the SNPs with P-values below 0.05 based on functional annotation and eQTL analysis rather than focusing on the top significant hits. Eight hundred and ninety-six independent markers were selected as candidate causal variants by functional annotation (Supplementary Table [S4](#MOESM3)) and were subjected to further *cis*-eQTL analysis on a pre-existing dataset of 193 neuropathologically normal human cortical samples^23^. After imputation and quality control, a total of 284 variants and 300 genes with detectable expression levels in at least 75% of the samples were available for 146 individuals. Of these, we identified 33 SNPs tagging *cis*-eQTL in 32 different loci (referred to as eGenes), with eight SNP-gene pairs surpassing the 0.05 false discovery rate (FDR) threshold: rs12302749-*SPSB2*, P_FDR_ = 1.13e-05; rs1061115-*PYROXD2*, P_FDR_ = 2.17e-04; rs2071421-*ARSA*, P_FDR_ = 7.26e-04; rs11553441-*RRP7A*, P_FDR_ = 7.26e-04; rs4902333-*CHURC1*, P_FDR_ = 7.26e-04; rs17279558-*GGH*, P_FDR_ = 0.013; rs9901673-*SENP3*, P_FDR_ = 0.023; and rs17685420-*PEBP4*, P_FDR_ = 0.041 (Table [1](#Tab1)).

### Table 1.

| Gene | Chra | Start baseb | Stop basec | SNP | SNP based | Risk allele | OR (95% CI) | GWAS P-value | Beta | eQTL P-value | eQTL adjusted P-value (FDR)e |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| SPSB2 | 12 | 6870935 | 6873357 | rs12302749 | 6867132 | T | 2.31 (1.22–4.39) | 0.011 | 0.115 | 3.34e-08 | 1.13e-05 |
| PYROXD2 | 10 | 98383565 | 98415221 | rs1061115 | 98417292 | G | 2.23 (1.13–4.41) | 0.021 | −0.088 | 1.28e-06 | 2.17e-04 |
| ARSA | 22 | 50622754 | 50628173 | rs2071421 | 50625988 | T | 2.56 (1.06–6.22) | 0.037 | 0.104 | 8.26e-06 | 7.26e-04 |
| RRP7A | 22 | 42508335 | 42519823 | rs11553441 | 42516091 | C | 3.13 (1.15–8.54) | 0.026 | 0.177 | 1.04e-05 | 7.26e-04 |
| CHURC1 | 14 | 64914361 | 64935368 | rs4902333 | 64909368 | T | 2.37 (1.24–4.51) | 8.73e-03 | 0.116 | 1.07e-05 | 7.26e-04 |
| GGH | 8 | 63015079 | 63039051 | rs17279558 | 63015187 | C | 3.61 (1.12–11.7) | 0.032 | 0.130 | 2.38e-04 | 0.013 |
| SENP3 | 17 | 7561992 | 7571969 | rs9901673 | 7580783 | A | 3.95 (1.79–8.71) | 6.53e-04 | 0.052 | 4.66e-04 | 0.023 |
| PEBP4 | 8 | 22713251 | 22941095 | rs17685420 | 22927888 | T | 2.87 (1.38–5.94) | 4.62e-03 | −0.073 | 9.72e-04 | 0.041 |
| STRBP | 9 | 123109494 | 123268576 | rs9032 | 123104493 | C | 2.28 (1.07–4.85) | 0.033 | 0.071 | 2.15e-03 | 0.081 |
| ETFDH | 4 | 158672101 | 158708713 | rs11559290 | 158680524 | C | 2.08 (1.01–4.28) | 0.048 | −0.048 | 2.57e-03 | 0.087 |
| CORO7 | 16 | 4354542 | 4416961 | rs3810818 | 4382028 | A | 2.10 (1.13–3.94) | 0.020 | −0.053 | 3.17e-03 | 0.098 |
| FXR2 | 17 | 7591230 | 7614897 | rs9901675 | 7581494 | A | 4.12 (1.32–12.9) | 0.015 | 0.130 | 3.84e-03 | 0.107 |
| NFIB | 9 | 14081843 | 14398983 | rs7858 | 14087770 | C | 2.89 (1.02–8.19) | 0.045 | −0.055 | 4.12e-03 | 0.107 |
| ALDH1L1 | 3 | 126103561 | 126181526 | rs2886059 | 126146923 | C | 2.73 (1.04–7.14) | 0.041 | −0.078 | 5.31e-03 | 0.129 |
| OPCML | 11 | 132403361 | 133532983 | rs751655 | 132623600 | C | 3.08 (1.18–8.02) | 0.022 | −0.063 | 7.43e-03 | 0.158 |
| PURA | 5 | 140114123 | 140119416 | rs2013169 | 140118020 | T | 3.32 (1.23–9.01) | 0.018 | 0.071 | 7.45e-03 | 0.158 |
| ZDHHC7 | 16 | 84974460 | 85011732 | rs3210967 | 84975857 | C | 2.09 (1.11–3.94) | 0.023 | 0.056 | 8.03e-03 | 0.160 |
| WRB | 21 | 39380287 | 39397889 | rs3761372 | 39371919 | T | 3.38 (1.39–8.22) | 7.36e-03 | 0.071 | 8.54e-03 | 0.161 |
| FARP2 | 2 | 241356249 | 241494842 | rs757978 | 241431686 | C | 5.18 (1.19–22.6) | 0.029 | 0.062 | 0.010 | 0.181 |
| SENP3 | 17 | 7561992 | 7571969 | rs11552708 | 7559238 | A | 3.81 (1.50–9.72) | 5.05e-03 | 0.041 | 0.011 | 0.189 |
| ZNF565 | 19 | 36182060 | 36215084 | rs4805162 | 36183403 | G | 2.24 (1.19–4.22) | 0.012 | 0.034 | 0.016 | 0.255 |
| ESYT2 | 7 | 158730998 | 158829628 | rs1061735 | 158733764 | G | 2.91 (1.10–7.67) | 0.031 | 0.030 | 0.017 | 0.255 |
| HTT | 4 | 3074510 | 3243960 | rs362272 | 3233253 | G | 2.40 (1.06–5.42) | 0.035 | −0.033 | 0.019 | 0.276 |
| CMTM8 | 3 | 32238679 | 32370325 | rs4627790 | 32259860 | C | 1.98 (1.07–3.68) | 0.030 | 0.054 | 0.021 | 0.298 |
| ZNF134 | 19 | 57614219 | 57624717 | rs10413455 | 57620255 | A | 5.75 (1.35–24.4) | 0.018 | 0.061 | 0.024 | 0.323 |
| PDIA2 | 16 | 283118 | 287209 | rs1048786 | 286916 | C | 3.55 (1.19–10.6) | 0.023 | −0.087 | 0.027 | 0.345 |
| PIGM | 1 | 160027672 | 160031993 | rs12409352 | 160030645 | A | 2.67 (1.00–7.12) | 0.049 | 0.029 | 0.032 | 0.395 |
| TRIB3 | 20 | 380629 | 397559 | rs2295490 | 388261 | G | 2.06 (1.06–4.00) | 0.033 | 0.092 | 0.034 | 0.406 |
| ZNF211 | 19 | 57633167 | 57644046 | rs10420097 | 57633193 | G | 7.29 (1.82–29.3) | 5.18e-03 | 0.084 | 0.038 | 0.439 |
| ARHGAP12 | 10 | 31805398 | 31928876 | rs2799018 | 31913141 | T | 1.89 (1.00–3.56) | 0.049 | −0.036 | 0.039 | 0.446 |
| ARHGEF28 | 5 | 73626158 | 73941993 | rs929740 | 73621913 | G | 2.52 (1.31–4.84) | 5.40e-03 | −0.037 | 0.042 | 0.453 |
| CDH23 | 10 | 71396934 | 71815947 | rs17712523 | 71777857 | G | 2.61 (1.05–6.48) | 0.039 | −0.073 | 0.045 | 0.475 |
| ELP5 | 17 | 7252053 | 7259940 | rs4562 | 7260420 | A | 2.22 (1.24–3.95) | 6.95e-03 | −0.031 | 0.048 | 0.497 |

Table 1 Caption: Cis-associated gene-SNP pairs with a nominal significant effect on methylphenidate response in the GWAS analysis.

### Functional and pathway enrichment analysis

The set of 32 eGenes included three candidates previously investigated in ADHD, namely *ALDH1L1*^34^, *CDH23*^35^ and *CMTM**8*^36^ (ratio = 0.007; P_B-H_ = 0.023), and showed over-representation of genes implicated in abnormal morphology of molecular layer of cerebellum (P_B-H_ = 0.012), abnormal morphology of white matter (P_B-H_ = 0.012), morphology of axons (P_B-H_ = 0.012), morphology and length of neurites (P_B-H_ = 0.012 and P_B-H_ = 0.021, respectively), coordination (P_B-H_ = 0.022), and formation of hippocampus (P_B-H_ = 0.033). Interestingly, categories related to neurological diseases, psychological disorders and behaviour were also significantly enriched, including learning deficit (P_B-H_ = 0.012), hyperactive behaviour (P_B-H_ = 0.015) and spatial learning (P_B-H_ = 0.018) (Table [2](#Tab2)).

### Table 2.

| Categories | Diseases or functions annotation | Adjusted P-value (Benjamini-Hochberg)a | Molecules |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Nervous System Development and Function, Organ Morphology, Organismal Development | abnormal morphology of molecular layer of cerebellum | 0.012 | ARSA, PURA |
| Nervous System Development and Function, Organ Morphology, Tissue Morphology | abnormal morphology of white matter | 0.012 | ARSA, PURA |
| Cellular Development, Embryonic Development, Organismal Development | differentiation of neuronal progenitor cells | 0.012 | FXR2, HTT |
| Developmental Disorder, Neurological Disease | learning deficit | 0.012 | ARSA, HTT |
| Cell Morphology, Nervous System Development and Function, Organ Morphology, Organismal Development, Tissue Morphology | morphology of granule cells | 0.012 | HTT, NFIB |
| Cell Morphology, Haematological System Development and Function, Nervous System Development and Function | morphology of microglia | 0.012 | ARSA, HTT |
| Neurological Disease | gait disturbance | 0.012 | ARSA, HTT, PURA |
| Cell Morphology, Nervous System Development and Function, Tissue Morphology | morphology of axons | 0.012 | ARSA, HTT, PURA |
| Cell Morphology, Nervous System Development and Function | morphology of neuroglia | 0.012 | ARSA, HTT, NFIB |
| Cell Morphology, Nervous System Development and Function, Organ Morphology, Organismal Development | morphology of brain cells | 0.012 | ARSA, HTT, NFIB, PURA |
| Cell Morphology, Nervous System Development and Function, Tissue Morphology | morphology of neurites | 0.012 | ARSA, FARP2, HTT, PURA |
| Cell Morphology, Nervous System Development and Function, Tissue Morphology | morphology of neurons | 0.012 | ARSA, CDH23, FARP2, HTT, NFIB, PURA |
| Neurological Disease | late-onset encephalopathy | 0.014 | ARSA, HTT |
| Psychological Disorders | hyperactive behaviour | 0.015 | ARSA, FXR2, HTT |
| Neurological Disease | tremor | 0.015 | ARSA, HTT, PURA |
| Nervous System Development and Function, Organ Morphology, Organismal Development | abnormal morphology of dentate gyrus | 0.015 | NFIB, PURA |
| Cell Morphology, Nervous System Development and Function, Organ Morphology, Organismal Development, Tissue Morphology | abnormal morphology of Purkinje cells | 0.015 | ARSA, PURA |
| Cell Death and Survival, Cellular Compromise, Neurological Disease, Organismal Injury and Abnormalities, Tissue Morphology | neurodegeneration of Purkinje cells | 0.015 | ARSA, HTT |
| Nervous System Development and Function, Organ Morphology, Organismal Development | abnormal morphology of telencephalon | 0.015 | ARSA, HTT, NFIB |
| Behaviour | spatial learning | 0.018 | ARSA, FXR2, HTT |
| Nervous System Development and Function, Organ Morphology, Organismal Development | mass of brain | 0.019 | HTT, PURA |
| Cell Morphology, Cellular Function and Maintenance, Nervous System Development and Function, Tissue Morphology | length of neurites | 0.021 | FARP2, HTT |
| Organismal Injury and Abnormalities | abnormality of head | 0.022 | HTT, NFIB |
| Nervous System Development and Function | coordination | 0.022 | ARSA, FXR2, HTT |
| Cellular Development | differentiation of stem cells | 0.022 | FXR2, HTT, NFIB |
| Developmental Disorder, Neurological Disease, Organismal Injury and Abnormalities | cerebral dysgenesis | 0.022 | NFIB, PURA |
| Nervous System Development and Function, Organ Morphology, Organismal Development | morphology of cerebral cortex | 0.023 | HTT, NFIB, PURA |
| Organismal Development | size of head | 0.024 | HTT, NFIB, PURA |
| Neurological Disease, Organismal Injury and Abnormalities | astrocytosis | 0.025 | ARSA, HTT |
| Cell Death and Survival, Cellular Compromise, Neurological Disease, Tissue Morphology | neurodegeneration of axons | 0.026 | ARSA, HTT |
| Cellular Growth and Proliferation, Nervous System Development and Function, Organ Development | proliferation of brain cells | 0.030 | HTT, PURA |
| Nervous System Development and Function, Organ Morphology, Organismal Development | abnormal morphology of brain | 0.030 | ARSA, HTT, NFIB, PURA |
| Embryonic Development, Organismal Development, Tissue Development | mesoderm development | 0.032 | CHURC1, HTT |
| Embryonic Development, Nervous System Development and Function, Organ Development, Organismal Development, Tissue Development | formation of hippocampus | 0.033 | HTT, NFIB |
| Nervous System Development and Function, Organ Morphology, Tissue Morphology | quantity of brain cells | 0.042 | HTT, PURA |
| Nervous System Development and Function | sensation | 0.047 | CDH23, FXR2, HTT |

Table 2 Caption: Significantly enriched biological functions and diseases identified by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis within the eGenes associated with methylphenidate response.

### Polygenic risk score analysis and meta-analysis using the target population

Finally, in order to assess the predictive value of our findings we first computed PRS derived from the present GWAS in an independent sample of ADHD adult patients for whom data on response to MPH were available. The demographic and clinical characteristics of the target population according to the response status are presented in Supplementary Table [S5](#MOESM1). Briefly, 85.2% of subjects (n = 161) were classified as responders, while 14.8% (n = 28) exhibited a reduced or lack of improvement. Responders and non-responders significantly differed with regard to CGI-S baseline scores, use of concomitant medication and presence of phobia as comorbid condition, and thus these additional risk factors were entered as covariates in the PRS model, as well as the 10 first principal components to control for population stratification. Since we did not detect significant results at any of the predefined P-value thresholds, we subsequently focused on the 33 eSNPs nominally associated with treatment outcome in the discovery sample and we increased statistical power by performing a meta-analysis across the discovery and the target population. Sixteen suggestive signals were identified (Table [3](#Tab3)). Among them, 15 revealed the same direction of effect, with rs17685420 in the *PEBP4* gene being significant after Bonferroni correction (OR = 3.07 (1.76–5.35), P = 7.90e-05), followed by additional compelling markers such as rs2071421 within *ARSA* (OR = 2.63 (1.29–5.37), P = 7.71e-03), rs2886059 in *ALDH1L1* (OR = 2.30 (1.14–4.66), P = 0.020), and rs17712523 in *CDH23* (OR = 2.13 (1.07–4.24), P = 0.031).

### Table 3.

| SNP | Chra | SNP baseb | Risk allele | SPAIN |  | BRAZIL |  | META-ANALYSIS |  | Gene |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| OR (95% CI) | P-value | OR (95% CI) | P-value | OR (95% CI) | P-valuec |  |  |  |  |  |
| rs17685420 | 8 | 22927888 | T | 2.87 (1.38–5.94) | 4.62e-03 | 3.38 (1.43–8.01) | 5.71e-03 | 3.07 (1.76–5.35) | 7.90e-05 | PEBP4 |
| rs3210967 | 16 | 84975857 | C | 2.09 (1.11–3.94) | 0.023 | 2.25 (1.02–4.94) | 0.044 | 2.15 (1.31–3.52) | 2.40e-03 | ZDHHC7 |
| rs10413455 | 19 | 57620255 | A | 5.75 (1.35–24.4) | 0.018 | 3.86 (0.63–23.7) | 0.144 | 4.93 (1.59–15.3) | 5.70e-03 | ZNF134 |
| rs2071421 | 22 | 50625988 | T | 2.56 (1.06–6.22) | 0.037 | 2.76 (0.84–9.15) | 0.096 | 2.63 (1.29–5.37) | 7.71e-03 | ARSA |
| rs12302749 | 12 | 6867132 | T | 2.31 (1.22–4.39) | 0.011 | 1.49 (0.72–3.10) | 0.280 | 1.91 (1.18–3.09) | 8.48e-03 | SPSB2 |
| rs10420097 | 19 | 57633193 | G | 7.29 (1.82–29.3) | 5.18e-03 | 1.58 (0.14–17.7) | 0.712 | 4.98 (1.49–16.6) | 9.13e-03 | ZNF211 |
| rs3810818 | 16 | 4382028 | A | 2.10 (1.13–3.94) | 0.020 | 1.40 (0.62–3.16) | 0.413 | 1.81 (1.10–2.97) | 0.019 | CORO7 |
| rs2886059 | 3 | 126146923 | C | 2.73 (1.04–7.14) | 0.041 | 1.89 (0.67–5.33) | 0.230 | 2.30 (1.14–4.66) | 0.020 | ALDH1L1 |
| rs9901675 | 17 | 7581494 | A | 4.12 (1.32–12.9) | 0.015 | 1.57 (0.33–7.46) | 0.572 | 2.95 (1.18–7.39) | 0.021 | FXR2 |
| rs4805162 | 19 | 36183403 | G | 2.24 (1.19–4.22) | 0.012 | 1.21 (0.59–2.50) | 0.608 | 1.72 (1.07–2.76) | 0.026 | ZNF565 |
| rs4562 | 17 | 7260420 | A | 2.22 (1.24–3.95) | 6.95e-03 | 1.05 (0.51–2.15) | 0.889 | 1.65 (1.05–2.59) | 0.029 | ELP5 |
| rs17712523 | 10 | 71777857 | G | 2.61 (1.05–6.48) | 0.039 | 1.63 (0.57–4.66) | 0.366 | 2.13 (1.07–4.24) | 0.031 | CDH23 |
| rs2799018 | 10 | 31913141 | T | 1.89 (1.00–3.56) | 0.049 | 1.40 (0.66–2.97) | 0.375 | 1.67 (1.03–2.71) | 0.038 | ARHGAP12 |
| rs12409352 | 1 | 160030645 | A | 2.67 (1.00–7.12) | 0.049 | 1.63 (0.54–4.95) | 0.387 | 2.15 (1.03–4.49) | 0.041 | PIGM |
| rs4902333 | 14 | 64909368 | T | 2.37 (1.24–4.51) | 8.73e-03 | 0.94 (0.41–2.18) | 0.893 | 1.68 (1.01–2.80) | 0.046 | CHURC1 |
| rs2295490 | 20 | 388261 | G | 2.06 (1.06–4.00) | 0.033 | 1.22 (0.48–3.13) | 0.678 | 1.73 (1.01–2.98) | 0.048 | TRIB3 |
| rs4627790 | 3 | 32259860 | C | 1.98 (1.07–3.68) | 0.030 | 1.13 (0.52–2.45) | 0.761 | 1.59 (0.98–2.59) | 0.060 | CMTM8 |
| rs1048786 | 16 | 286916 | C | 3.55 (1.19–10.6) | 0.023 | 1.15 (0.38–3.48) | 0.805 | 2.03 (0.93–4.43) | 0.074 | PDIA2 |
| rs9901673 | 17 | 7580783 | A | 3.95 (1.79–8.71) | 6.53e-04 | 0.21 (0.054–0.77) | 0.019 | 1.82 (0.92–3.59) | 0.084 | SENP3 |
| rs751655 | 11 | 132623600 | C | 3.08 (1.18–8.02) | 0.022 | 0.99 (0.37–2.62) | 0.986 | 1.76 (0.89–3.49) | 0.104 | OPCML |
| rs11559290 | 4 | 158680524 | C | 2.08 (1.01–4.28) | 0.048 | 1.03 (0.39–2.74) | 0.957 | 1.62 (0.90–2.90) | 0.105 | ETFDH |
| rs7858 | 9 | 14087770 | C | 2.89 (1.02–8.19) | 0.045 | 1.12 (0.41–3.09) | 0.820 | 1.78 (0.86–3.67) | 0.119 | NFIB |
| rs929740 | 5 | 73621913 | G | 2.52 (1.31–4.84) | 5.40e-03 | 0.69 (0.34–1.41) | 0.313 | 1.40 (0.87–2.27) | 0.169 | ARHGEF28 |
| rs9032 | 9 | 123104493 | C | 2.28 (1.07–4.85) | 0.033 | 0.71 (0.25–2.01) | 0.515 | 1.52 (0.82–2.81) | 0.179 | STRBP |
| rs11552708 | 17 | 7559238 | A | 3.81 (1.50–9.72) | 5.05e-03 | 0.11 (0.020–0.62) | 0.012 | 1.70 (0.75–3.86) | 0.207 | SENP3 |
| rs1061735 | 7 | 158733764 | G | 2.91 (1.10–7.67) | 0.031 | 0.79 (0.32–1.98) | 0.618 | 1.46 (0.75–2.84) | 0.265 | ESYT2 |
| rs11553441 | 22 | 42516091 | C | 3.13 (1.15–8.54) | 0.026 | 0.74 (0.29–1.90) | 0.529 | 1.46 (0.73–2.90) | 0.284 | RRP7A |
| rs362272 | 4 | 3233253 | G | 2.40 (1.06–5.42) | 0.035 | 0.72 (0.31–1.68) | 0.451 | 1.34 (0.75–2.41) | 0.324 | HTT |
| rs757978 | 2 | 241431686 | C | 5.18 (1.19–22.6) | 0.029 | 0.74 (0.22–2.42) | 0.613 | 1.59 (0.63–4.01) | 0.325 | FARP2 |
| rs17279558 | 8 | 63015187 | C | 3.61 (1.12–11.7) | 0.032 | 0.37 (0.081–1.74) | 0.210 | 1.56 (0.62–3.97) | 0.348 | GGH |
| rs3761372 | 21 | 39371919 | T | 3.38 (1.39–8.22) | 7.36e-03 | 0.65 (0.30–1.39) | 0.268 | 1.31 (0.73–2.33) | 0.365 | WRB |
| rs1061115 | 10 | 98417292 | G | 2.23 (1.13–4.41) | 0.021 | 0.58 (0.28–1.24) | 0.161 | 1.22 (0.74–2.02) | 0.438 | PYROXD2 |
| rs2013169 | 5 | 140118020 | T | 3.32 (1.23–9.01) | 0.018 | 0.28 (0.11–0.73) | 9.33e-03 | 0.92 (0.46–1.84) | 0.813 | PURA |

Table 3 Caption: Meta-analysis of the eSNPs nominally associated with methylphenidate response across the discovery and the target population.

## Discussion

To our knowledge, this is the first study investigating the genetic basis of MPH response from an integrative perspective that combines GWAS data, functional annotation, eQTL in relevant tissues to ADHD and pathway enrichment analyses. Our results highlight genes related to nervous system development and function, neurological diseases and psychological disorders. Thus, this comprehensive strategy provides a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms implicated in MPH treatment effects and suggests promising candidates that may contribute to clinical outcome.

In our attempt to improve earlier genetic studies by bridging the gap between genotype and phenotype, we prioritised the nominally significant SNPs based on functional annotation and *cis*-eQTL analysis in human brain, and we identified three candidates previously investigated in ADHD: *ALDH1L1*^34^, *CDH23*^35^ and *CMTM**8*^36^. Of these, *CMTM8* showed overlapping association between adult ADHD and bipolar disorder^36^, and *ALDH1L1*, which yielded suggestive results in the present meta-analysis of MPH response, has been related to other neuropsychiatric conditions such as major depressive disorder or schizophrenia^37,38^. In addition, the *ALDH1L1* locus was found among the top hits of a GWAS conducted on children and adolescents with ADHD^34^ and contains non-synonymous rare variants identified through whole-exome sequencing in an ADHD nuclear family^39^. Similarly, *CDH23* harbours one of the top SNPs from a pooling-based GWA of adult ADHD^35^ and reached nominal significance in our meta-analysis. *CDH23* is a member of the cadherin superfamily that mediates calcium-dependent cell-cell adhesion. The activity of cadherins depends on their anchorage to the neuronal cytoskeleton through proteins termed catenins (e.g., CTNNA2), which in turn activate KALRN, a key regulator of dendritic spine development and synaptic plasticity underlying learning and memory^40^. This is of particular interest since catenin-cadherin cell-adhesion complexes are important in cerebellar and hippocampal lamination^41^ and both *CTNNA2* and *KALRN* have shown nominal associations with clinical outcome in our GWAS. In this sense, Park *et al*.^41^ demonstrated that mice lacking the actin-binding domain of Ctnna2 (*cdf*-mutant mice) exhibited abnormal morphology of cerebellum and hippocampus. Moreover, the *cdf*-mutant mice showed an impaired control of the startle response and deficits in startle modulation have also been found in ADHD patients^42,43^. Therefore, cell-adhesion molecules and regulators of synaptic plasticity may play a role in MPH treatment effects, which is in agreement with data from genome-wide linkage and association studies pointing to cadherin13 (*CDH13*) as one of the most consistent candidates implicated in ADHD pathophysiology. Specifically, *CDH13* was detected in three independent GWAS^34,35,44^ and lies within the 16q22-16q24 region identified in a meta-analysis of seven ADHD linkage scans^45^. Furthermore, SNPs in this gene have been linked to defects in verbal working memory and hyperactive/impulsive symptoms in subjects with ADHD^46,47^, addiction vulnerability and drug dependence (e.g., methamphetamine, alcohol, and nicotine)^48,49^.

Pathway enrichment analysis provided further evidence for neuroplastic changes in response to MPH treatment, considering the over-representation of genes involved in morphology of neurons, neuroglia, white matter and brain regions relevant to ADHD (e.g., cerebellum, cerebral cortex, and hippocampus) that we found among eGenes associated with drug response. Our results are in accordance to a wealth of data from neuroimaging studies showing that unmedicated ADHD patients present cortical thickness and reduced white matter volume in several areas of the brain compared to healthy subjects, while medicated children do not differ from control group^50–53^. In addition to structural alterations, ADHD patients exhibit deficits in neural functioning, which may be normalised by MPH. In this sense, Rubia *et al*.^54–56^ demonstrated that MPH restores the aberrant activation and functional connectivity in attention, motivation and interference inhibition networks, as well as during error processing, thus improving neuropsychological performance of subjects with ADHD.

It should also be noted that 15 out of the 32 eGenes included in the pathway enrichment analysis harboured variants which provided preliminary evidence for an association with clinical outcome across the discovery and an independent sample. Our top hit from the meta-analysis, rs17685420, is located in the phosphatidylethanolamine binding protein 4 (PEBP4), a member of an evolutionary conserved family of proteins with pivotal biological functions such as cell proliferation and survival, stimulation of acetylcholine synthesis and inhibition of serine proteases^57^. Given that serine proteases are implicated in many processes during development and tissue homeostasis (e.g., neuronal outgrowth, cell migration, and cell death), disturbances in their activity on the nervous system have been proposed as a possible pathological mechanism for neurological disorders^58^. Indeed, Hohman *et al*.^59^ identified a gene-gene interaction involving *PEBP4* associated with late onset Alzheimer’s disease (AD) across 13 independent datasets, and decreased expression levels have been found in hippocampus of both AD patients and mouse models for another phosphatidylethanolamine binding protein, the PEBP1^60–62^, which has also shown alterations after methamphetamine and morphine administration^63,64^. Additional compelling results were detected for *ARSA*, *SPSB2*, *CORO7* and *PIGM*. The *ARSA* gene encodes the arylsulfatase A, whose deficiency is characterised by decline in school performance, emergence of behavioural problems and neurologic symptoms, such as cerebellar ataxia, among others^65^. *SPSB2* has been associated with borderline personality disorder in a genome-wide methylation analysis^66^ and *CORO7*, which has shown to be important in brain development^67^, was identified as a novel candidate gene for emotionality by comparing the expression profile of two mouse lines with either high or low anxiety-related behaviour^68^. Finally, mutations in the *PIGM* gene, which encodes a protein involved in the synthesis of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor, have been reported in individuals with severe neurological features, including seizures, muscular hypotonia and intellectual disability^69^.

Another interesting finding arising from our research is the significant enrichment for candidates previously related to ADHD or MPH response detected among the set of genes nominally associated with treatment outcome. It is worth mentioning that four of these candidates, namely *CTNNA2* (rs79067553, P = 3.51e-05), *PARD3B* (rs62172701, P = 3.28e-04), *LRP1B* (rs410870, P = 4.00e-04) and *GRM7* (rs17047590, P = 6.36e-04), were significant at P < 1e-03 in the present GWAS analysis. In particular, the metabotropic glutamate receptor 7 (GRM7), which is widely expressed in brain regions relevant to ADHD such as the cerebral cortex, the hippocampus and the cerebellum^51,70^ and has been associated with the disorder^71–73^, was also found among the top hits in a prior GWAS of MPH efficacy^13^, thus supporting the role of the glutaminergic system as a moderator of treatment outcome.

The main strengths of our design include the coverage of a considerably higher number of genetic variants in comparison with the study from Mick *et al*.^13^ (319,722 vs 3,566,199 markers), the use of an integrative approach that combines GWAS data with bioinformatic methods, and the follow up of our top signals in an independent cohort, which did increase the association of a number of markers located in loci with biologically plausible functions (*PEBP4*, *ARSA*, and *SPSB2*). Nevertheless, some limitations should also be considered when interpreting these results. Given the limited sample size, the present study might not be sufficiently powered to detect individual variants of modest effects and we did not identify any loci reaching the genome-wide threshold. This constraint, however, is heavily conditioned on the difficulty to find the required phenotype as shown by the sample size of the studies included in the last meta-analysis of candidate gene-based investigations on MPH response^74^. The small dimension of our paediatric sample could also explain the lack of significance of the PRS derived from the GWAS results in an independent population of ADHD adult patients. Alternatively, this discrepancy may be attributed to differences in the genetic background and the clinical heterogeneity (e.g., comorbidities, frequency of clinical subtypes, and sex ratio) of ADHD among children and adults, as suggested by most of the pharmacogenetic studies conducted in adult samples, which failed to replicate variants previously identified in children and adolescents^75^. Additional methodological aspects or distinct environmental influences between the discovery and the target population may also be responsible for the absence of association.

In conclusion, despite not reaching any genome-wide significant association, our results are consistent with previous findings and highlight genes related to morphological abnormalities in brain regions important for motor control, attention and memory, thus supporting the use of bioinformatic and biological evidence as a complement to GWAS data to disentangle the genetic basis of MPH response.

## Electronic supplementary material

## Acknowledgements

We are grateful to patients from the Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron and the Adult ADHD Outpatient Clinic of the Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, who kindly participated in this research. Genotyping was performed at the Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America. Statistical analyses were carried out on the Genetic Cluster Computer ([http://www.geneticcluster.org](http://www.geneticcluster.org)) hosted by SURFsara and financially supported by the Netherlands Scientific Organization (NWO 480-05-003 PI: Posthuma) along with a supplement from the Dutch Brain Foundation and the VU University Amsterdam. Over the course of this investigation, M.P. has been a recipient of a pre-doctoral fellowship from the Vall d’Hebron Research Institute (PRED-VHIR-2013) and a research grant from the Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst (DAAD), Germany (Research Grants - Short-Term Grants, 2017). C.S.M. is a recipient of a Sara Borrell contract and a mobility grant from the Spanish Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad, Instituto de Salud Carlos III (CD15/00199 and MV16/00039). M.S.A. is a recipient of a contract from the Biomedical Network Research Centre on Mental Health (CIBERSAM), Madrid, Spain. P.R. is a recipient of a pre-doctoral fellowship from the Agència de Gestió d’Ajuts Universitaris i de Recerca (AGAUR), Generalitat de Catalunya, Spain (2016FI_B 00899). I.G.M. is a recipient of a contract from the 7th Framework Programme for Research, Technological Development and Demonstration, European Commission (AGGRESSOTYPE_FP7HEALTH2013/602805). E.C.S. is a recipient of a pre-doctoral fellowship from the Collaborative Research Training Programme for Medical Doctors (PhD4MD), Institut de Recerca Biomèdica de Barcelona (IRB Barcelona), Spain (II14/00018). M.R. is a recipient of a Miguel de Servet contract from the Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spain (CP09/00119 and CPII15/00023). This work was funded by Fundación Alicia Koplowitz and Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI12/01139, PI14/01700, PI15/01789, PI16/01505), and co-financed by the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), Agència de Gestió d’Ajuts Universitaris i de Recerca-AGAUR, Generalitat de Catalunya, Spain (2014SGR1357, 2014SGR0932), Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad, Spain (SAF2015-68341-R), the European College of Neuropsychopharmacology (ECNP network: ‘ADHD across the lifespan’), Departament de Salut, Generalitat de Catalunya, Spain, and a NARSAD Young Investigator Grant from the Brain & Behavior Research Foundation. The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Union H2020 Programme [H2020/2014-2020] under grant agreements Nos. 667302 (CoCA) and 643051 (MiND).

## Author Contributions

M.P., C.S.M., P.R. and I.G.M. participated in the DNA isolation and preparation of samples. M.P., C.S.M., P.R., M.S.A., I.G.M., B.S.S. and N.R.M. undertook the statistical analyses. V.R., E.C.S., M.C., M.M.V. and E.H.G. contributed to the clinical assessment and recruitment of patients. L.A.R., C.H.D.B., Prof. M.C. and J.A.R.Q. participated in the study design, clinical assessment and coordination of the clinical research. M.R. conceived the project, wrote the protocol and coordinated the study design and the statistical analyses. B.C., J.A.R.Q. and M.R. supervised the project and the manuscript preparation. All authors contributed to and have approved the final version.

### Competing Interests

### Competing Interests

E.H.G. has served on the speakers’ bureau and has received travel grants from Shire and Novartis. He has also been on the advisory board and acted as a consultant for Shire. L.A.R. has served on the speakers’ bureau, acted as a consultant and received grant or research support from Eli Lilly and Co., Janssen-Cilag, Medice, Novartis, and Shire. The ADHD and Juvenile Bipolar Disorder Outpatient Programs chaired by L.A.R. have received unrestricted educational and research support from the following pharmaceutical companies: Eli Lilly and Co., Janssen-Cilag, Novartis, and Shire. L.A.R. has received travel grants from Shire to take part in the 2014 APA, 2015 WFADHD and 2016 AACAP congresses. He has received royalties from Artmed Editora and Oxford University Press. Prof. M.C. has received travel grants and research support from Eli Lilly and Co., Janssen-Cilag, Shire, and Laboratorios Rubió. He has been on the advisory board and served as a consultant for Eli Lilly and Co., Janssen-Cilag, Shire, and Laboratorios Rubió. J.A.R.Q. has served on the speakers’ bureau and acted as a consultant for Eli Lilly and Co., Janssen-Cilag, Novartis, Lundbeck, Shire, Ferrer, and Laboratorios Rubió. He has received travel awards from Eli Lilly and Co., Janssen-Cilag, and Shire for participating in psychiatric meetings. The ADHD Program chaired by J.A.R.Q. has received unrestricted educational and research support from Eli Lilly and Co., Janssen-Cilag, Shire, Rovi, and Laboratorios Rubió in the past two years. The remaining authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Footnotes

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Supplementary Materials

### Data Availability Statement

The datasets generated and/or analysed during the current study are not publicly available due to ethics constraints but are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

### Supplementary Materials

### Data Availability Statement

The datasets generated and/or analysed during the current study are not publicly available due to ethics constraints but are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

## References

1. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic And Statistical Manual Of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition. (American Psychiatric Publishing Association, 2013).

2. Polanczyk GV, Willcutt EG, Salum GA, Kieling C, Rohde LA. ADHD prevalence estimates across three decades: an updated systematic review and meta-regression analysis. Int J Epidemiol. 2014;43:434–442. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyt261.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyt261) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4817588/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24464188/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int%20J%20Epidemiol.&title=ADHD%20prevalence%20estimates%20across%20three%20decades:%20an%20updated%20systematic%20review%20and%20meta-regression%20analysis&author=GV%20Polanczyk&author=EG%20Willcutt&author=GA%20Salum&author=C%20Kieling&author=LA%20Rohde&volume=43&publication_year=2014&pages=434-442&pmid=24464188&doi=10.1093/ije/dyt261&)

3. Doshi JA, et al. Economic impact of childhood and adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in the United States. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2012;51:990–1002 e2. doi: 10.1016/j.jaac.2012.07.008.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2012.07.008) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23021476/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Am%20Acad%20Child%20Adolesc%20Psychiatry.&title=Economic%20impact%20of%20childhood%20and%20adult%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder%20in%20the%20United%20States&author=JA%20Doshi&volume=51&publication_year=2012&pages=990-1002%20e2&pmid=23021476&doi=10.1016/j.jaac.2012.07.008&)

4. Le HH, et al. Economic impact of childhood/adolescent ADHD in a European setting: the Netherlands as a reference case. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2014;23:587–598. doi: 10.1007/s00787-013-0477-8.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00787-013-0477-8) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4077218/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24166532/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20Child%20Adolesc%20Psychiatry.&title=Economic%20impact%20of%20childhood/adolescent%20ADHD%20in%20a%20European%20setting:%20the%20Netherlands%20as%20a%20reference%20case&author=HH%20Le&volume=23&publication_year=2014&pages=587-598&pmid=24166532&doi=10.1007/s00787-013-0477-8&)

5. Faraone SV, Mick E. Molecular genetics of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2010;33:159–180. doi: 10.1016/j.psc.2009.12.004.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psc.2009.12.004) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2847260/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20159345/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Psychiatr%20Clin%20North%20Am.&title=Molecular%20genetics%20of%20attention%20deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder&author=SV%20Faraone&author=E%20Mick&volume=33&publication_year=2010&pages=159-180&pmid=20159345&doi=10.1016/j.psc.2009.12.004&)

6. Blum NJ, Jawad AF, Clarke AT, Power TJ. Effect of osmotic-release oral system methylphenidate on different domains of attention and executive functioning in children with attention-deficit-hyperactivity disorder. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2011;53:843–849. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8749.2011.03944.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8749.2011.03944.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21585365/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Dev%20Med%20Child%20Neurol.&title=Effect%20of%20osmotic-release%20oral%20system%20methylphenidate%20on%20different%20domains%20of%20attention%20and%20executive%20functioning%20in%20children%20with%20attention-deficit-hyperactivity%20disorder&author=NJ%20Blum&author=AF%20Jawad&author=AT%20Clarke&author=TJ%20Power&volume=53&publication_year=2011&pages=843-849&pmid=21585365&doi=10.1111/j.1469-8749.2011.03944.x&)

7. Greenhill L, et al. Guidelines and algorithms for the use of methylphenidate in children with Attention-Deficit/ Hyperactivity Disorder. J Atten Disord. 2002;6(Suppl 1):S89–100. doi: 10.1177/070674370200601S11.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1177/070674370200601S11) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12685523/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Atten%20Disord.&title=Guidelines%20and%20algorithms%20for%20the%20use%20of%20methylphenidate%20in%20children%20with%20Attention-Deficit/%20Hyperactivity%20Disorder&author=L%20Greenhill&volume=6&issue=Suppl%201&publication_year=2002&pages=S89-100&pmid=12685523&doi=10.1177/070674370200601S11&)

8. Charach A, Ickowicz A, Schachar R. Stimulant treatment over five years: adherence, effectiveness, and adverse effects. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2004;43:559–567. doi: 10.1097/00004583-200405000-00009.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/00004583-200405000-00009) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15100562/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Am%20Acad%20Child%20Adolesc%20Psychiatry.&title=Stimulant%20treatment%20over%20five%20years:%20adherence,%20effectiveness,%20and%20adverse%20effects&author=A%20Charach&author=A%20Ickowicz&author=R%20Schachar&volume=43&publication_year=2004&pages=559-567&pmid=15100562&doi=10.1097/00004583-200405000-00009&)

9. Wolraich ML, Doffing MA. Pharmacokinetic considerations in the treatment of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder with methylphenidate. CNS Drugs. 2004;18:243–250. doi: 10.2165/00023210-200418040-00004.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2165/00023210-200418040-00004) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15015904/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=CNS%20Drugs.&title=Pharmacokinetic%20considerations%20in%20the%20treatment%20of%20attention-deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder%20with%20methylphenidate&author=ML%20Wolraich&author=MA%20Doffing&volume=18&publication_year=2004&pages=243-250&pmid=15015904&doi=10.2165/00023210-200418040-00004&)

10. Wilens TE. Effects of methylphenidate on the catecholaminergic system in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2008;28:S46–53. doi: 10.1097/JCP.0b013e318173312f.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/JCP.0b013e318173312f) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18480677/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Psychopharmacol.&title=Effects%20of%20methylphenidate%20on%20the%20catecholaminergic%20system%20in%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder&author=TE%20Wilens&volume=28&publication_year=2008&pages=S46-53&pmid=18480677&doi=10.1097/JCP.0b013e318173312f&)

11. Kieling C, Genro JP, Hutz MH, Rohde LA. A current update on ADHD pharmacogenomics. Pharmacogenomics. 2010;11:407–419. doi: 10.2217/pgs.10.28.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2217/pgs.10.28) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20235795/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics.&title=A%20current%20update%20on%20ADHD%20pharmacogenomics&author=C%20Kieling&author=JP%20Genro&author=MH%20Hutz&author=LA%20Rohde&volume=11&publication_year=2010&pages=407-419&pmid=20235795&doi=10.2217/pgs.10.28&)

12. Bruxel EM, et al. ADHD pharmacogenetics across the life cycle: New findings and perspectives. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2014;165B:263–282. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.b.32240.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.b.32240) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24804845/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Med%20Genet%20B%20Neuropsychiatr%20Genet.&title=ADHD%20pharmacogenetics%20across%20the%20life%20cycle:%20New%20findings%20and%20perspectives&author=EM%20Bruxel&volume=165B&publication_year=2014&pages=263-282&pmid=24804845&doi=10.1002/ajmg.b.32240&)

13. Mick E, Neale B, Middleton FA, McGough JJ, Faraone SV. Genome-wide association study of response to methylphenidate in 187 children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008;147B:1412–1418. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30865.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.b.30865) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18821564/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Med%20Genet%20B%20Neuropsychiatr%20Genet.&title=Genome-wide%20association%20study%20of%20response%20to%20methylphenidate%20in%20187%20children%20with%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder&author=E%20Mick&author=B%20Neale&author=FA%20Middleton&author=JJ%20McGough&author=SV%20Faraone&volume=147B&publication_year=2008&pages=1412-1418&pmid=18821564&doi=10.1002/ajmg.b.30865&)

14. Mick E, McGough JJ, Middleton FA, Neale B, Faraone SV. Genome-wide association study of blood pressure response to methylphenidate treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2011;35:466–472. doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2010.11.037.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2010.11.037) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21130132/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Prog%20Neuropsychopharmacol%20Biol%20Psychiatry.&title=Genome-wide%20association%20study%20of%20blood%20pressure%20response%20to%20methylphenidate%20treatment%20of%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder&author=E%20Mick&author=JJ%20McGough&author=FA%20Middleton&author=B%20Neale&author=SV%20Faraone&volume=35&publication_year=2011&pages=466-472&pmid=21130132&doi=10.1016/j.pnpbp.2010.11.037&)

15. Pagerols M, et al. Pharmacogenetics of methylphenidate response and tolerability in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Pharmacogenomics J. 2017;17:98–104. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2015.89.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/tpj.2015.89) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26810137/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics%20J.&title=Pharmacogenetics%20of%20methylphenidate%20response%20and%20tolerability%20in%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder&author=M%20Pagerols&volume=17&publication_year=2017&pages=98-104&pmid=26810137&doi=10.1038/tpj.2015.89&)

16. Guy, W. ECDEU Assessment Manual For Psychopharmacology, Revised. (US Department of Health, Education and Welfare, 1976).

17. Miller SA, Dykes DD, Polesky HF. A simple salting out procedure for extracting DNA from human nucleated cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 1988;16:1215. doi: 10.1093/nar/16.3.1215.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/16.3.1215) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC334765/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3344216/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res.&title=A%20simple%20salting%20out%20procedure%20for%20extracting%20DNA%20from%20human%20nucleated%20cells&author=SA%20Miller&author=DD%20Dykes&author=HF%20Polesky&volume=16&publication_year=1988&pages=1215&pmid=3344216&doi=10.1093/nar/16.3.1215&)

18. Purcell S, et al. PLINK: a tool set for whole-genome association and population-based linkage analyses. Am J Hum Genet. 2007;81:559–575. doi: 10.1086/519795.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/519795) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1950838/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17701901/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Hum%20Genet.&title=PLINK:%20a%20tool%20set%20for%20whole-genome%20association%20and%20population-based%20linkage%20analyses&author=S%20Purcell&volume=81&publication_year=2007&pages=559-575&pmid=17701901&doi=10.1086/519795&)

19. Xu Z, Taylor JA. SNPinfo: integrating GWAS and candidate gene information into functional SNP selection for genetic association studies. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009;37:W600–605. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp290.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkp290) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2703930/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19417063/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res.&title=SNPinfo:%20integrating%20GWAS%20and%20candidate%20gene%20information%20into%20functional%20SNP%20selection%20for%20genetic%20association%20studies&author=Z%20Xu&author=JA%20Taylor&volume=37&publication_year=2009&pages=W600-605&pmid=19417063&doi=10.1093/nar/gkp290&)

20. Elnitski L, et al. Distinguishing regulatory DNA from neutral sites. Genome Res. 2003;13:64–72. doi: 10.1101/gr.817703.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.817703) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC430974/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12529307/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Res.&title=Distinguishing%20regulatory%20DNA%20from%20neutral%20sites&author=L%20Elnitski&volume=13&publication_year=2003&pages=64-72&pmid=12529307&doi=10.1101/gr.817703&)

21. Elnitski L, Jin VX, Farnham PJ, Jones SJ. Locating mammalian transcription factor binding sites: a survey of computational and experimental techniques. Genome Res. 2006;16:1455–1464. doi: 10.1101/gr.4140006.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.4140006) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17053094/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Res.&title=Locating%20mammalian%20transcription%20factor%20binding%20sites:%20a%20survey%20of%20computational%20and%20experimental%20techniques&author=L%20Elnitski&author=VX%20Jin&author=PJ%20Farnham&author=SJ%20Jones&volume=16&publication_year=2006&pages=1455-1464&pmid=17053094&doi=10.1101/gr.4140006&)

22. King DC, et al. Evaluation of regulatory potential and conservation scores for detecting cis-regulatory modules in aligned mammalian genome sequences. Genome Res. 2005;15:1051–1060. doi: 10.1101/gr.3642605.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.3642605) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1182217/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16024817/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Res.&title=Evaluation%20of%20regulatory%20potential%20and%20conservation%20scores%20for%20detecting%20cis-regulatory%20modules%20in%20aligned%20mammalian%20genome%20sequences&author=DC%20King&volume=15&publication_year=2005&pages=1051-1060&pmid=16024817&doi=10.1101/gr.3642605&)

23. Myers AJ, et al. A survey of genetic human cortical gene expression. Nat Genet. 2007;39:1494–1499. doi: 10.1038/ng.2007.16.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2007.16) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17982457/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet.&title=A%20survey%20of%20genetic%20human%20cortical%20gene%20expression&author=AJ%20Myers&volume=39&publication_year=2007&pages=1494-1499&pmid=17982457&doi=10.1038/ng.2007.16&)

24. Shabalin AA. Matrix eQTL: ultra fast eQTL analysis via large matrix operations. Bioinformatics. 2012;28:1353–1358. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts163.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts163) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3348564/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22492648/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics.&title=Matrix%20eQTL:%20ultra%20fast%20eQTL%20analysis%20via%20large%20matrix%20operations&author=AA%20Shabalin&volume=28&publication_year=2012&pages=1353-1358&pmid=22492648&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/bts163&)

25. Zhang L, et al. ADHDgene: a genetic database for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012;40:D1003–1009. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr992.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkr992) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3245028/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22080511/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res.&title=ADHDgene:%20a%20genetic%20database%20for%20attention%20deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder&author=L%20Zhang&volume=40&publication_year=2012&pages=D1003-1009&pmid=22080511&doi=10.1093/nar/gkr992&)

26. Asherson P, Gurling H. Quantitative and molecular genetics of ADHD. Curr Top Behav Neurosci. 2012;9:239–272. doi: 10.1007/7854_2011_155.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/7854_2011_155) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21989848/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Top%20Behav%20Neurosci.&title=Quantitative%20and%20molecular%20genetics%20of%20ADHD&author=P%20Asherson&author=H%20Gurling&volume=9&publication_year=2012&pages=239-272&pmid=21989848&doi=10.1007/7854_2011_155&)

27. Bonvicini C, Faraone SV, Scassellati C. Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis of genetic, pharmacogenetic and biochemical studies. Mol Psychiatry. 2016;21:872–884. doi: 10.1038/mp.2016.74.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2016.74) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5414093/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27217152/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Psychiatry.&title=Attention-deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder%20in%20adults:%20A%20systematic%20review%20and%20meta-analysis%20of%20genetic,%20pharmacogenetic%20and%20biochemical%20studies&author=C%20Bonvicini&author=SV%20Faraone&author=C%20Scassellati&volume=21&publication_year=2016&pages=872-884&pmid=27217152&doi=10.1038/mp.2016.74&)

28. Froehlich TE, McGough JJ, Stein MA. Progress and promise of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder pharmacogenetics. CNS Drugs. 2010;24:99–117. doi: 10.2165/11530290-000000000-00000.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2165/11530290-000000000-00000) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2874888/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20088618/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=CNS%20Drugs.&title=Progress%20and%20promise%20of%20attention-deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder%20pharmacogenetics&author=TE%20Froehlich&author=JJ%20McGough&author=MA%20Stein&volume=24&publication_year=2010&pages=99-117&pmid=20088618&doi=10.2165/11530290-000000000-00000&)

29. Gao Q, Liu L, Qian Q, Wang Y. Advances in molecular genetic studies of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in China. Shanghai Arch Psychiatry. 2014;26:194–206. doi: 10.3969/j.issn.1002-0829.2014.04.003.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3969/j.issn.1002-0829.2014.04.003) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4194002/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25317006/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Shanghai%20Arch%20Psychiatry.&title=Advances%20in%20molecular%20genetic%20studies%20of%20attention%20deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder%20in%20China&author=Q%20Gao&author=L%20Liu&author=Q%20Qian&author=Y%20Wang&volume=26&publication_year=2014&pages=194-206&pmid=25317006&doi=10.3969/j.issn.1002-0829.2014.04.003&)

30. Hawi Z, et al. The molecular genetic architecture of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Mol Psychiatry. 2015;20:289–297. doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.183.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2014.183) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25600112/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Psychiatry.&title=The%20molecular%20genetic%20architecture%20of%20attention%20deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder&author=Z%20Hawi&volume=20&publication_year=2015&pages=289-297&pmid=25600112&doi=10.1038/mp.2014.183&)

31. Li Z, Chang SH, Zhang LY, Gao L, Wang J. Molecular genetic studies of ADHD and its candidate genes: a review. Psychiatry Res. 2014;219:10–24. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2014.05.005.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2014.05.005) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24863865/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Psychiatry%20Res.&title=Molecular%20genetic%20studies%20of%20ADHD%20and%20its%20candidate%20genes:%20a%20review&author=Z%20Li&author=SH%20Chang&author=LY%20Zhang&author=L%20Gao&author=J%20Wang&volume=219&publication_year=2014&pages=10-24&pmid=24863865&doi=10.1016/j.psychres.2014.05.005&)

32. Euesden J, Lewis CM, O’Reilly PF. PRSice: Polygenic Risk Score software. Bioinformatics. 2015;31:1466–1468. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu848.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btu848) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4410663/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25550326/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics.&title=PRSice:%20Polygenic%20Risk%20Score%20software&author=J%20Euesden&author=CM%20Lewis&author=PF%20O%E2%80%99Reilly&volume=31&publication_year=2015&pages=1466-1468&pmid=25550326&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btu848&)

33. Contini V, et al. Adrenergic α2A receptor gene is not associated with methylphenidate response in adults with ADHD. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2011;261:205–211. doi: 10.1007/s00406-010-0172-4.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00406-010-0172-4) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21103886/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20Arch%20Psychiatry%20Clin%20Neurosci.&title=Adrenergic%20%CE%B12A%20receptor%20gene%20is%20not%20associated%20with%20methylphenidate%20response%20in%20adults%20with%20ADHD&author=V%20Contini&volume=261&publication_year=2011&pages=205-211&pmid=21103886&doi=10.1007/s00406-010-0172-4&)

34. Neale BM, et al. Case-control genome-wide association study of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2010;49:906–920. doi: 10.1016/j.jaac.2010.06.007.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2010.06.007) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2928577/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20732627/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Am%20Acad%20Child%20Adolesc%20Psychiatry.&title=Case-control%20genome-wide%20association%20study%20of%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder&author=BM%20Neale&volume=49&publication_year=2010&pages=906-920&pmid=20732627&doi=10.1016/j.jaac.2010.06.007&)

35. Lesch KP, et al. Molecular genetics of adult ADHD: converging evidence from genome-wide association and extended pedigree linkage studies. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2008;115:1573–1585. doi: 10.1007/s00702-008-0119-3.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-008-0119-3) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18839057/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Neural%20Transm%20(Vienna).&title=Molecular%20genetics%20of%20adult%20ADHD:%20converging%20evidence%20from%20genome-wide%20association%20and%20extended%20pedigree%20linkage%20studies&author=KP%20Lesch&volume=115&publication_year=2008&pages=1573-1585&pmid=18839057&doi=10.1007/s00702-008-0119-3&)

36. Weber H, et al. Cross-disorder analysis of bipolar risk genes: further evidence of DGKH as a risk gene for bipolar disorder, but also unipolar depression and adult ADHD. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2011;36:2076–2085. doi: 10.1038/npp.2011.98.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2011.98) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3158324/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21654738/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuropsychopharmacology.&title=Cross-disorder%20analysis%20of%20bipolar%20risk%20genes:%20further%20evidence%20of%20DGKH%20as%20a%20risk%20gene%20for%20bipolar%20disorder,%20but%20also%20unipolar%20depression%20and%20adult%20ADHD&author=H%20Weber&volume=36&publication_year=2011&pages=2076-2085&pmid=21654738&doi=10.1038/npp.2011.98&)

37. Barley K, Dracheva S, Byne W. Subcortical oligodendrocyte- and astrocyte-associated gene expression in subjects with schizophrenia, major depression and bipolar disorder. Schizophr Res. 2009;112:54–64. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2009.04.019.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2009.04.019) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19447584/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Schizophr%20Res.&title=Subcortical%20oligodendrocyte-%20and%20astrocyte-associated%20gene%20expression%20in%20subjects%20with%20schizophrenia,%20major%20depression%20and%20bipolar%20disorder&author=K%20Barley&author=S%20Dracheva&author=W%20Byne&volume=112&publication_year=2009&pages=54-64&pmid=19447584&doi=10.1016/j.schres.2009.04.019&)

38. Kurian SM, et al. Identification of blood biomarkers for psychosis using convergent functional genomics. Mol Psychiatry. 2011;16:37–58. doi: 10.1038/mp.2009.117.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2009.117) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19935739/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Psychiatry.&title=Identification%20of%20blood%20biomarkers%20for%20psychosis%20using%20convergent%20functional%20genomics&author=SM%20Kurian&volume=16&publication_year=2011&pages=37-58&pmid=19935739&doi=10.1038/mp.2009.117&)

39. Lyon GJ, et al. Exome sequencing and unrelated findings in the context of complex disease research: ethical and clinical implications. Discov Med. 2011;12:41–55.  [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3544941/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21794208/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Discov%20Med.&title=Exome%20sequencing%20and%20unrelated%20findings%20in%20the%20context%20of%20complex%20disease%20research:%20ethical%20and%20clinical%20implications&author=GJ%20Lyon&volume=12&publication_year=2011&pages=41-55&pmid=21794208&)

40. Penzes P, Jones KA. Dendritic spine dynamics–a key role for kalirin-7. Trends Neurosci. 2008;31:419–427. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2008.06.001.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2008.06.001) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3973420/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18597863/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Trends%20Neurosci.&title=Dendritic%20spine%20dynamics%E2%80%93a%20key%20role%20for%20kalirin-7&author=P%20Penzes&author=KA%20Jones&volume=31&publication_year=2008&pages=419-427&pmid=18597863&doi=10.1016/j.tins.2008.06.001&)

41. Park C, Falls W, Finger JH, Longo-Guess CM, Ackerman SL. Deletion in Catna2, encoding alpha N-catenin, causes cerebellar and hippocampal lamination defects and impaired startle modulation. Nat Genet. 2002;31:279–284. doi: 10.1038/ng908.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng908) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12089526/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet.&title=Deletion%20in%20Catna2,%20encoding%20alpha%20N-catenin,%20causes%20cerebellar%20and%20hippocampal%20lamination%20defects%20and%20impaired%20startle%20modulation&author=C%20Park&author=W%20Falls&author=JH%20Finger&author=CM%20Longo-Guess&author=SL%20Ackerman&volume=31&publication_year=2002&pages=279-284&pmid=12089526&doi=10.1038/ng908&)

42. Conzelmann A, et al. Methylphenidate normalizes emotional processing in adult patients with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: preliminary findings. Brain Res. 2011;1381:159–166. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.12.085.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2010.12.085) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21215727/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Brain%20Res.&title=Methylphenidate%20normalizes%20emotional%20processing%20in%20adult%20patients%20with%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder:%20preliminary%20findings&author=A%20Conzelmann&volume=1381&publication_year=2011&pages=159-166&pmid=21215727&doi=10.1016/j.brainres.2010.12.085&)

43. Conzelmann, A. et al. Methylphenidate and emotional-motivational processing in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Neural Transm (Vienna).123, 971–979 (2016).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-016-1512-y) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26852138/)

44. Lasky-Su J, et al. Genome-wide association scan of quantitative traits for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder identifies novel associations and confirms candidate gene associations. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008;147B:1345–1354. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30867.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.b.30867) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18821565/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Med%20Genet%20B%20Neuropsychiatr%20Genet.&title=Genome-wide%20association%20scan%20of%20quantitative%20traits%20for%20attention%20deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder%20identifies%20novel%20associations%20and%20confirms%20candidate%20gene%20associations&author=J%20Lasky-Su&volume=147B&publication_year=2008&pages=1345-1354&pmid=18821565&doi=10.1002/ajmg.b.30867&)

45. Zhou K, et al. Meta-analysis of genome-wide linkage scans of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008;147B:1392–1398. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30878.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.b.30878) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2890047/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18988193/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Med%20Genet%20B%20Neuropsychiatr%20Genet.&title=Meta-analysis%20of%20genome-wide%20linkage%20scans%20of%20attention%20deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder&author=K%20Zhou&volume=147B&publication_year=2008&pages=1392-1398&pmid=18988193&doi=10.1002/ajmg.b.30878&)

46. Arias-Vasquez A, et al. CDH13 is associated with working memory performance in attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Genes Brain Behav. 2011;10:844–851. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2011.00724.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1601-183X.2011.00724.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21815997/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genes%20Brain%20Behav.&title=CDH13%20is%20associated%20with%20working%20memory%20performance%20in%20attention%20deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder&author=A%20Arias-Vasquez&volume=10&publication_year=2011&pages=844-851&pmid=21815997&doi=10.1111/j.1601-183X.2011.00724.x&)

47. Salatino-Oliveira A, et al. Cadherin-13 gene is associated with hyperactive/impulsive symptoms in attention/deficit hyperactivity disorder. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2015;168B:162–169. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.b.32293.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.b.32293) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25739828/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Med%20Genet%20B%20Neuropsychiatr%20Genet.&title=Cadherin-13%20gene%20is%20associated%20with%20hyperactive/impulsive%20symptoms%20in%20attention/deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder&author=A%20Salatino-Oliveira&volume=168B&publication_year=2015&pages=162-169&pmid=25739828&doi=10.1002/ajmg.b.32293&)

48. Drgon T, et al. Genome-wide association for nicotine dependence and smoking cessation success in NIH research volunteers. Mol Med. 2009;15:21–27. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2009.00040.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2119/molmed.2009.00040) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2581605/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19009022/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Med.&title=Genome-wide%20association%20for%20nicotine%20dependence%20and%20smoking%20cessation%20success%20in%20NIH%20research%20volunteers&author=T%20Drgon&volume=15&publication_year=2009&pages=21-27&pmid=19009022&doi=10.2119/molmed.2009.00040&)

49. Treutlein J, Rietschel M. Genome-wide association studies of alcohol dependence and substance use disorders. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2011;13:147–155. doi: 10.1007/s11920-011-0176-4.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11920-011-0176-4) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21253885/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Psychiatry%20Rep.&title=Genome-wide%20association%20studies%20of%20alcohol%20dependence%20and%20substance%20use%20disorders&author=J%20Treutlein&author=M%20Rietschel&volume=13&publication_year=2011&pages=147-155&pmid=21253885&doi=10.1007/s11920-011-0176-4&)

50. Castellanos FX, et al. Developmental trajectories of brain volume abnormalities in children and adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. JAMA. 2002;288:1740–1748. doi: 10.1001/jama.288.14.1740.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.288.14.1740) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12365958/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=JAMA.&title=Developmental%20trajectories%20of%20brain%20volume%20abnormalities%20in%20children%20and%20adolescents%20with%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder&author=FX%20Castellanos&volume=288&publication_year=2002&pages=1740-1748&pmid=12365958&doi=10.1001/jama.288.14.1740&)

51. Cortese S. The neurobiology and genetics of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD): what every clinician should know. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2012;16:422–433. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2012.01.009.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpn.2012.01.009) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22306277/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20J%20Paediatr%20Neurol.&title=The%20neurobiology%20and%20genetics%20of%20Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity%20Disorder%20(ADHD):%20what%20every%20clinician%20should%20know&author=S%20Cortese&volume=16&publication_year=2012&pages=422-433&pmid=22306277&doi=10.1016/j.ejpn.2012.01.009&)

52. Hoogman M, et al. Subcortical brain volume differences in participants with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in children and adults: a cross-sectional mega-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry. 2017;4:310–319. doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(17)30049-4.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(17)30049-4) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5933934/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28219628/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Lancet%20Psychiatry.&title=Subcortical%20brain%20volume%20differences%20in%20participants%20with%20attention%20deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder%20in%20children%20and%20adults:%20a%20cross-sectional%20mega-analysis&author=M%20Hoogman&volume=4&publication_year=2017&pages=310-319&pmid=28219628&doi=10.1016/S2215-0366(17)30049-4&)

53. Kasparek T, Theiner P, Filova A. Neurobiology of ADHD From Childhood to Adulthood: Findings of Imaging Methods. J Atten Disord. 2015;19:931–943. doi: 10.1177/1087054713505322.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1177/1087054713505322) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24097847/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Atten%20Disord.&title=Neurobiology%20of%20ADHD%20From%20Childhood%20to%20Adulthood:%20Findings%20of%20Imaging%20Methods&author=T%20Kasparek&author=P%20Theiner&author=A%20Filova&volume=19&publication_year=2015&pages=931-943&pmid=24097847&doi=10.1177/1087054713505322&)

54. Rubia K, et al. Methylphenidate normalises activation and functional connectivity deficits in attention and motivation networks in medication-naive children with ADHD during a rewarded continuous performance task. Neuropharmacology. 2009;57:640–652. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2009.08.013.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2009.08.013) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19715709/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuropharmacology.&title=Methylphenidate%20normalises%20activation%20and%20functional%20connectivity%20deficits%20in%20attention%20and%20motivation%20networks%20in%20medication-naive%20children%20with%20ADHD%20during%20a%20rewarded%20continuous%20performance%20task&author=K%20Rubia&volume=57&publication_year=2009&pages=640-652&pmid=19715709&doi=10.1016/j.neuropharm.2009.08.013&)

55. Rubia K, et al. Methylphenidate normalizes fronto-striatal underactivation during interference inhibition in medication-naive boys with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2011;36:1575–1586. doi: 10.1038/npp.2011.30.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2011.30) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3116801/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21451498/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuropsychopharmacology.&title=Methylphenidate%20normalizes%20fronto-striatal%20underactivation%20during%20interference%20inhibition%20in%20medication-naive%20boys%20with%20attention-deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder&author=K%20Rubia&volume=36&publication_year=2011&pages=1575-1586&pmid=21451498&doi=10.1038/npp.2011.30&)

56. Rubia K, Halari R, Mohammad AM, Taylor E, Brammer M. Methylphenidate normalizes frontocingulate underactivation during error processing in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2011;70:255–262. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.04.018.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.04.018) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3139835/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21664605/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biol%20Psychiatry.&title=Methylphenidate%20normalizes%20frontocingulate%20underactivation%20during%20error%20processing%20in%20attention-deficit/hyperactivity%20disorder&author=K%20Rubia&author=R%20Halari&author=AM%20Mohammad&author=E%20Taylor&author=M%20Brammer&volume=70&publication_year=2011&pages=255-262&pmid=21664605&doi=10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.04.018&)

57. He H, et al. Phosphatidylethanolamine binding protein 4 (PEBP4) is a secreted protein and has multiple functions. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016;1863:1682–1689. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2016.03.022.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2016.03.022) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5336313/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27033522/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biochim%20Biophys%20Acta.&title=Phosphatidylethanolamine%20binding%20protein%204%20(PEBP4)%20is%20a%20secreted%20protein%20and%20has%20multiple%20functions&author=H%20He&volume=1863&publication_year=2016&pages=1682-1689&pmid=27033522&doi=10.1016/j.bbamcr.2016.03.022&)

58. Hengst U, Albrecht H, Hess D, Monard D. The phosphatidylethanolamine-binding protein is the prototype of a novel family of serine protease inhibitors. J Biol Chem. 2001;276:535–540. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M002524200.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M002524200) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11034991/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Biol%20Chem.&title=The%20phosphatidylethanolamine-binding%20protein%20is%20the%20prototype%20of%20a%20novel%20family%20of%20serine%20protease%20inhibitors&author=U%20Hengst&author=H%20Albrecht&author=D%20Hess&author=D%20Monard&volume=276&publication_year=2001&pages=535-540&pmid=11034991&doi=10.1074/jbc.M002524200&)

59. Hohman TJ, et al. Discovery of gene-gene interactions across multiple independent data sets of late onset Alzheimer disease from the Alzheimer Disease Genetics Consortium. Neurobiol Aging. 2016;38:141–150. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.10.031.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.10.031) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4735733/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26827652/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neurobiol%20Aging.&title=Discovery%20of%20gene-gene%20interactions%20across%20multiple%20independent%20data%20sets%20of%20late%20onset%20Alzheimer%20disease%20from%20the%20Alzheimer%20Disease%20Genetics%20Consortium&author=TJ%20Hohman&volume=38&publication_year=2016&pages=141-150&pmid=26827652&doi=10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.10.031&)

60. George AJ, et al. A serial analysis of gene expression profile of the Alzheimer’s disease Tg2576 mouse model. Neurotox Res. 2010;17:360–379. doi: 10.1007/s12640-009-9112-3.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12640-009-9112-3) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19760337/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neurotox%20Res.&title=A%20serial%20analysis%20of%20gene%20expression%20profile%20of%20the%20Alzheimer%E2%80%99s%20disease%20Tg2576%20mouse%20model&author=AJ%20George&volume=17&publication_year=2010&pages=360-379&pmid=19760337&doi=10.1007/s12640-009-9112-3&)

61. George AJ, et al. Decreased phosphatidylethanolamine binding protein expression correlates with Abeta accumulation in the Tg2576 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging. 2006;27:614–623. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2005.03.014.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2005.03.014) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15941609/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neurobiol%20Aging.&title=Decreased%20phosphatidylethanolamine%20binding%20protein%20expression%20correlates%20with%20Abeta%20accumulation%20in%20the%20Tg2576%20mouse%20model%20of%20Alzheimer%E2%80%99s%20disease&author=AJ%20George&volume=27&publication_year=2006&pages=614-623&pmid=15941609&doi=10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2005.03.014&)

62. Maki M, et al. Decreased expression of hippocampal cholinergic neurostimulating peptide precursor protein mRNA in the hippocampus in Alzheimer disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2002;61:176–185. doi: 10.1093/jnen/61.2.176.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnen/61.2.176) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11853019/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Neuropathol%20Exp%20Neurol.&title=Decreased%20expression%20of%20hippocampal%20cholinergic%20neurostimulating%20peptide%20precursor%20protein%20mRNA%20in%20the%20hippocampus%20in%20Alzheimer%20disease&author=M%20Maki&volume=61&publication_year=2002&pages=176-185&pmid=11853019&doi=10.1093/jnen/61.2.176&)

63. Kobeissy FH, et al. Psychoproteomic analysis of rat cortex following acute methamphetamine exposure. J Proteome Res. 2008;7:1971–1983. doi: 10.1021/pr800029h.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1021/pr800029h) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18452277/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Proteome%20Res.&title=Psychoproteomic%20analysis%20of%20rat%20cortex%20following%20acute%20methamphetamine%20exposure&author=FH%20Kobeissy&volume=7&publication_year=2008&pages=1971-1983&pmid=18452277&doi=10.1021/pr800029h&)

64. Wei QH, et al. Involvement of hippocampal phosphatidylethanolamine-binding protein in morphine dependence and withdrawal. Addict Biol. 2013;18:230–240. doi: 10.1111/j.1369-1600.2011.00379.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1369-1600.2011.00379.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21967037/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Addict%20Biol.&title=Involvement%20of%20hippocampal%20phosphatidylethanolamine-binding%20protein%20in%20morphine%20dependence%20and%20withdrawal&author=QH%20Wei&volume=18&publication_year=2013&pages=230-240&pmid=21967037&doi=10.1111/j.1369-1600.2011.00379.x&)

65. Lugowska, A. et al. A homozygote for the c.459+1G>A mutation in the ARSA gene presents with cereballar ataxia as the only first clinical sign of metachromatic leukodystrophy. J Neurol Sci.338, 214–217 (2014).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2013.12.030) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24411407/)

66. Prados J, et al. Borderline personality disorder and childhood maltreatment: a genome-wide methylation analysis. Genes Brain Behav. 2015;14:177–188. doi: 10.1111/gbb.12197.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/gbb.12197) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25612291/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genes%20Brain%20Behav.&title=Borderline%20personality%20disorder%20and%20childhood%20maltreatment:%20a%20genome-wide%20methylation%20analysis&author=J%20Prados&volume=14&publication_year=2015&pages=177-188&pmid=25612291&doi=10.1111/gbb.12197&)

67. Rybakin V, et al. Coronin 7, the mammalian POD-1 homologue, localizes to the Golgi apparatus. FEBS Lett. 2004;573:161–167. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2004.07.066.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2004.07.066) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15327992/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=FEBS%20Lett.&title=Coronin%207,%20the%20mammalian%20POD-1%20homologue,%20localizes%20to%20the%20Golgi%20apparatus&author=V%20Rybakin&volume=573&publication_year=2004&pages=161-167&pmid=15327992&doi=10.1016/j.febslet.2004.07.066&)

68. Czibere L, et al. Profiling trait anxiety: transcriptome analysis reveals cathepsin B (Ctsb) as a novel candidate gene for emotionality in mice. PLoS One. 2011;6:e23604. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023604.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0023604) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3163650/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21897848/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20One.&title=Profiling%20trait%20anxiety:%20transcriptome%20analysis%20reveals%20cathepsin%20B%20(Ctsb)%20as%20a%20novel%20candidate%20gene%20for%20emotionality%20in%20mice&author=L%20Czibere&volume=6&publication_year=2011&pages=e23604&pmid=21897848&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0023604&)

69. Krawitz PM, et al. PGAP2 mutations, affecting the GPI-anchor synthesis pathway, cause hyperphosphatasia with mental retardation syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 2013;92:584–589. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.03.011.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.03.011) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3617374/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23561847/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Hum%20Genet.&title=PGAP2%20mutations,%20affecting%20the%20GPI-anchor%20synthesis%20pathway,%20cause%20hyperphosphatasia%20with%20mental%20retardation%20syndrome&author=PM%20Krawitz&volume=92&publication_year=2013&pages=584-589&pmid=23561847&doi=10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.03.011&)

70. Makoff A, Pilling C, Harrington K, Emson P. Human metabotropic glutamate receptor type 7: molecular cloning and mRNA distribution in the CNS. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1996;40:165–170. doi: 10.1016/0169-328X(96)00110-6.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0169-328X(96)00110-6) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8840028/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Brain%20Res%20Mol%20Brain%20Res.&title=Human%20metabotropic%20glutamate%20receptor%20type%207:%20molecular%20cloning%20and%20mRNA%20distribution%20in%20the%20CNS&author=A%20Makoff&author=C%20Pilling&author=K%20Harrington&author=P%20Emson&volume=40&publication_year=1996&pages=165-170&pmid=8840028&doi=10.1016/0169-328X(96)00110-6&)

71. Elia J, et al. Genome-wide copy number variation study associates metabotropic glutamate receptor gene networks with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Nat Genet. 2011;44:78–84. doi: 10.1038/ng.1013.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.1013) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4310555/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22138692/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet.&title=Genome-wide%20copy%20number%20variation%20study%20associates%20metabotropic%20glutamate%20receptor%20gene%20networks%20with%20attention%20deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder&author=J%20Elia&volume=44&publication_year=2011&pages=78-84&pmid=22138692&doi=10.1038/ng.1013&)

72. Park, S. et al. Association between the GRM7 rs3792452 polymorphism and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in a Korean sample. Behav Brain Funct.9, 1 (2013).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1744-9081-9-1) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3680053/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23295062/)

73. Yang L, et al. Polygenic transmission and complex neuro developmental network for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: genome-wide association study of both common and rare variants. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2013;162B:419–430. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.b.32169.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.b.32169) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4321789/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23728934/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Med%20Genet%20B%20Neuropsychiatr%20Genet.&title=Polygenic%20transmission%20and%20complex%20neuro%20developmental%20network%20for%20attention%20deficit%20hyperactivity%20disorder:%20genome-wide%20association%20study%20of%20both%20common%20and%20rare%20variants&author=L%20Yang&volume=162B&publication_year=2013&pages=419-430&pmid=23728934&doi=10.1002/ajmg.b.32169&)

74. Myer, N. M., Boland, J. R. & Faraone, S. V. Pharmacogenetics predictors of methylphenidate efficacy in childhood ADHD. Mol Psychiatry. E-pub ahead of print 12 December. 10.1038/mp.2017.234 (2017).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2017.234) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7039663/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29230023/)

75. Contini V, et al. Pharmacogenetics of response to methylphenidate in adult patients with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD): a systematic review. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013;23:555–560. doi: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2012.05.006.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroneuro.2012.05.006) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22709890/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20Neuropsychopharmacol.&title=Pharmacogenetics%20of%20response%20to%20methylphenidate%20in%20adult%20patients%20with%20Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity%20Disorder%20(ADHD):%20a%20systematic%20review&author=V%20Contini&volume=23&publication_year=2013&pages=555-560&pmid=22709890&doi=10.1016/j.euroneuro.2012.05.006&)
