# HLA-DQA1-HLA-DRB1 variants confer susceptibility to pancreatitis induced by thiopurine immunosuppressants

## Metadata
**Authors:** Graham A Heap, Michael N Weedon, Claire M Bewshea, Abhey Singh, Mian Chen, Jack B Satchwell, Julian P Vivian, Kenji So, Patrick C Dubois, Jane M Andrews, Vito Annese, Peter Bampton, Martin Barnardo, Sally Bell, Andy Cole, Susan J Connor, Tom Creed, Fraser R Cummings, Mauro D'Amato, Tawfique K Daneshmend, Richard N Fedorak, Timothy H Florin, Daniel R Gaya, Emma Greig, Jonas Halfvarson, Alisa Hart, Peter M Irving, Gareth Jones, Amir Karban, Ian C Lawrance, James C Lee, Charlie Lees, Raffi Lev-Tzion, James O Lindsay, John Mansfield, Joel Mawdsley, Zia Mazhar, Miles Parkes, Kirstie Parnell, Timothy R Orchard, Graham Radford-Smith, Richard K Russell, David Reffitt, Jack Satsangi, Mark S Silverberg, Giacomo C Sturniolo, Mark Tremelling, Epameinondas V Tsianos, David A van Heel, Alissa Walsh, Gill Watermeyer, Rinse K Weersma, Sebastian Zeissig, Jamie Rossjohn, Arthur L Holden, International Serious Adverse Events Consortium, IBD Pharmacogenetics Study Group, Tariq Ahmad
**Journal:** Nature genetics
**Date:** 2014 Sep 14
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.3093](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3093)
**PMID:** 25217962
**PMCID:** PMC6379053
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6379053/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6379053/pdf/emss-81478.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6379053/pdf/emss-81478.pdf)

## Abstract

Pancreatitis occurs in approximately 4% of patients treated with the thiopurines azathioprine or mercaptopurine. Its development is unpredictable and almost always leads to drug withdrawal. We identified inflammatory bowel disease patients who had developed pancreatitis within three months of starting these drugs from 168 sites around the world. After detailed case adjudication, we performed a genome wide association study on 172 cases, and 2035 inflammatory bowel disease controls. Strong evidence of association was identified within the class II HLA region with the most significant association at rs2647087 (Odds ratio 2.59, 95% CI 2.07 – 3.26 P=2x10-16). These findings were replicated in an independent set of 78 cases and 472 IBD controls matched for drug exposure. Fine mapping of the HLA region identified association with the HLA-DQA1*02:01-HLA-DRB1*07:01 haplotype. Patients heterozygous at rs2647087 have a 9% risk of developing pancreatitis after administration of a thiopurine, while homozygous patients have a 17% risk.

## Online Methods

### Patient Recruitment and selection

Patients were identified and recruited from 115 NHS hospital UK research sites and 53 international sites. Cases were identified through electronic searches of patient databases, pathology services, directly through gastroenterology clinics and by direct advertising to patients. The protocol was approved by the National Research Ethics Committee South West, Exeter (11/SW/0222) and by all local research and development offices.

Inclusion criteria for patient recruitment included all of the following:

At the patient recruitment visit, a case report form was completed that detailed demographic, clinical and drug history after informed consent was obtained. Two 6ml EDTA blood samples were taken at the same visit for DNA extraction (BD Vacutainer, USA).

To assess patient eligibility, an adjudication panel assessed causality from case report forms using an adapted version of the validated Liverpool Adverse Drug Reaction Causality Assessment Tool displayed in [Supplementary Figure 3](#SD1) [9](#R9). All cases were reviewed independently by four medically trained experts and assigned a causality category based on the assessment tool. Confounding medications or conditions (listed below) classified the patient as a possible cause of thiopurine-induced pancreatitis:

The collective results from each panel member were collated and the panel discussed discrepant cases before a final adjudication decision was reached. A set of guidelines was drawn up through the course of these expert meetings to ensure consistent decision-making in borderline cases. These guidelines are displayed in the [Supplementary Information](#SM) and help illustrate the robust phenotype assessment undertaken for all cases. Co-administration of a thiopurine with any drug known to cause drug-induced pancreatitis (Class 1a or class 1b as defined by Badalov et al [23](#R23)) within the three months prior to the development of pancreatitis classified the patient as having had “possible” thiopurine-induced pancreatitis. Only patients classified as “definite” or “probable” cases of thiopurine-induced pancreatitis were taken forward to subsequent clinical and genetic analyses.

### DNA Extraction and Genotyping

DNA was extracted from EDTA stabilised blood using the Qiagen Autopure LS with Puregene chemistry. 248 samples were genotyped on the Illumina Infinium HumanCoreExome beadchip (Illumina, USA), which contains 264,909 tagging SNP markers, and 244,593 exome focused markers by the Broad Institute (Boston, USA).

472 IBD patients who had been screened for thiopurine use without development of pancreatitis from the Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Trust were used as a control cohort for replication analysis. These 472 samples, together with the 87 thiopurine induced pancreatitis cases were genotyped at four SNPs (rs2647087, rs6935723, rs2647089 and rs7745656) using the KASP™ genotyping assay by LGC Limited, UK. Analysis was limited to the 78 samples that self identified as “White”. The genotyping success rates were > 97% for all SNPs.

### Genetic and Statistical Analysis

The study was open for data collection from March 2012 to December 2013. Multivariate linear regression analysis was used to calculate risk variables. Logistic regression was used for categorical variables. Severe pancreatitis was defined as single organ failure or greater. Smoking status was calculated based on number of pack years (number of packs of 20 cigarettes per day multiplied by years smoked). For study entry a raised amylase or lipase was characterised as a greater than or equal to a two fold increase above the upper limit of normal for the research site’s local laboratory. Relative risks for genotypes were calculated from odds ratios based on the formula [24](#R24):

| Relativerisk=oddsratio/(1−baselinerisk+(baselinerisk×oddsratio)) |
| --- |
All statistical analysis was undertaken in R (Version 3.0.2) and Stata (Version 13). Manhattan and QQ plots were created with the qqman R package.

### Quality control of SNPs and samples before imputation

Genotyping was performed on 217 cases assigned as having “definite” or “probable” thiopurine-induced pancreatitis using the HumanCoreExome SNP Chip. Genotypes were called using Gencall [25](#R25). We excluded SNPs with a HWE *P*<0.0001 and a genotype success rate <0.99. We excluded indels. Exclusion criteria for case samples were genotyping success rate <0.98 and a heterozygosity rate >4SD (5 samples removed). We used zCall to improve calling of low frequency variants [26](#R26). After running zCall, SNPs were excluded if they had a HWE P<0.0001, MAF<0.01 or if they were duplicated. This left 254,457 autosomal SNPs for imputation. The control patients with Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis were obtained from the International IBD Genetics Consortium as part of the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC 1 for Crohn’s disease and WTCCC 2 for Ulcerative Colitis) [27](#R27)^,^[28](#R28). There were 1748 CD control samples genotyped on the Affymetrix 500K SNP chip and 2361 UC samples genotyped on the Affymetrix 6 SNP chip available for this analysis. Preliminary QC had already been performed on the 1748 CD and 2361 UC samples [27](#R27)^,^[28](#R28). From these two control cohorts, we excluded SNPs with a genotyping success rate <0.99, MAF<0.01 and a HWE *P*<0.0001 – this left 396,255 (Crohn’s disease) and 727,195 (Ulcerative Colitis) autosomal SNPs. To exclude ethnic outliers we performed principal components analysis using GCTA [29](#R29). To generate the principal components we used a set of 79,974 SNPs that were imputed with R^2^>0.99 in the cases (see below) and directly genotyped in the two control cohorts ([Supplementary Figure 4](#SD1)). 40 cases and 66 control samples were excluded for being >4SD for the first or second principal components. The case exclusions were consistent with self-reported non-European ancestry. We used KING [30](#R30) to test for cryptic relatedness between samples. If a case and control pair of samples had a kinship coefficient >0.2 we excluded the control sample, otherwise we excluded one of the pair of samples at random if both were in the same cohort. Six control samples were excluded because of relatedness to a pancreatitis case patient. Nine Crohn’s disease control samples were excluded because they were diagnosed with pancreatitis and also included in the case cohort. After exclusions this left 172 “probable” and “definite” cases, 80% of which had Crohn’s disease. To match the ratio of Crohn’s disease to ulcerative colitis patients in the control group to that in the case cohort we used all the 1669 Crohn’s disease patents that passed QC and a random 366 samples from the ulcerative colitis cohort in subsequent association analyses.

### Genome-wide and HLA Imputation and association analyses

We used minimac [13](#R13) to impute into the European phase1 version 3 (20101123) panel SNPs and indels reference panel. 76% of the 9,412,474 SNPs with MAF>1% frequency was imputed at RSQ>0.6 in the cases: 75% in the Crohn’s disease (CD) controls and 82% in the ulcerative colitis (UC) controls. Each of the three case and control cohorts used a different SNP genotyping chip. This has been reported to lead to spurious associations [31](#R31). Therefore, to avoid excessive false positive associations we focused subsequent association analyses on a very conservative subset of 2,819,700 SNPs that had an RSQ>0.95 in all three cohorts. For dedicated imputation of the HLA region we used SNP2HLA [14](#R14) and imputed into the T1DGC reference panel of 5,224 individuals that have had classical HLA alleles typed as well as SNPs and indels by the immunochip. 8321 of the 8961 variants in the T1DGC panel were captured with an INFO score > 0.8. mach2dat [32](#R32) was used to perform the association analyses for the genome-wide analysis, and PLINK [33](#R33) was used to perform the association analyses for the HLA imputed analysis. A standard test for dominance deviation analysis was performed whereby we tested if the genotype coded 0/1/0 improved upon a regression model which included a term for the genotype coded 0/1/2.

### In-silico peptide binding

Computational docking was performed to probe the binding of mercaptopurine to HLA-DRB1*07:01. As a crystal structure of HLA-DRB1*07:01 is not available, the HLA-DRB1*07:01 was homology modelled from the crystal structure of HLA-DRB1*04:01 (PDB code 4MCY [34](#R34)). For comparison, docking runs were also performed with HLA-DRB1*01:01 (PDB code 4AH2), HLA-DRB1*04:01 (PDB code 4MCY), HLA-DRB3*01:01 (PDB code 2Q6W), HLA-DP2 (PDB code 3LQZ) and HLA-DQ8 (PDB code 2NNA). AutoDock Tools 1.5.6 [35](#R35) was used to assign hydrogens, Gasteiger charges and rotatable bonds to the compounds. Each docking run was performed in the absence of peptide within the binding cleft and utilised the AutoDock Vina software [36](#R36) to search a docking grid that encompassed the entire peptide-binding cleft.

### Data access

Phenotype and genotype data for cases is freely available upon request from the iSAEC Data Access Committee for users who comply with the Consortium’s Data Release and IP Policy. Data will be available within 12 months of genotype completion. Raw genotype data is freely available to researchers upon request. For further data access details please contact saec@c2b2.columbia.edu.

Genotype data for the WTCCC Ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease cases are available from the European Genome-Phenome Archive.

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgements

The International Serious Adverse Events Consortium (iSAEC) funded the sample collection and genotyping. The UK National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) provided research nurse support to facilitate recruitment at all UK research sites. We would like to thank Crohn’s and Colitis UK for funding support and publicising this study to its members. A Wellcome Trust Institutional Strategic Support Award (WT097835MF) generously supported the work in this study. Genotyping was undertaken at the Broad Institute, USA. We would like to thank all the clinicians who assisted with sample collection as part of the IBD Pharmacogenetics Study Group (listed in the [Supplementary Information](#SM)) and Suzie Marriott for her assistance during the trial initiation. We would like to acknowledge The International Serious Adverse Events Scientific Management Committee members (listed in the [Supplementary Information](#SM)), Dr Tim Frayling, Dr Siying Lin & Dr Karen Hunt for kindly providing comments on the draft manuscript as well as Clare Heard and Marian Parkinson for their on-going administrative support to the study. We would also like to thank all the patients for their time and participation.

## Footnotes

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Supplementary Materials

### Supplementary Materials

## References

1. Health and Social Care Information Centre. Quarterly Prescription Cost Analysis, England. 2013.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Quarterly%20Prescription%20Cost%20Analysis,%20England&publication_year=2013&)

2. Prefontaine E, Lr S, Jk M, Cepoiu M. Azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine for maintenance of remission in Crohn ’s disease (Review) Cochrane database Syst Rev. 2010 doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000067.pub2.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD000067.pub2) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19160175/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cochrane%20database%20Syst%20Rev&title=Azathioprine%20or%206-mercaptopurine%20for%20maintenance%20of%20remission%20in%20Crohn%20%E2%80%99s%20disease%20(Review)&author=E%20Prefontaine&author=S%20Lr&author=M%20Jk&author=M%20Cepoiu&publication_year=2010&pmid=19160175&doi=10.1002/14651858.CD000067.pub2&)

3. Timmer A, et al. Azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine for maintenance of remission in ulcerative colitis (Review) Cochrane database Syst Rev. 2012 doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000478.pub3. CD000478.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD000478.pub3) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22972046/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cochrane%20database%20Syst%20Rev&title=Azathioprine%20and%206-mercaptopurine%20for%20maintenance%20of%20remission%20in%20ulcerative%20colitis%20(Review)&author=A%20Timmer&publication_year=2012&pmid=22972046&doi=10.1002/14651858.CD000478.pub3&)

4. Cosnes J, et al. Early administration of azathioprine vs conventional management of Crohn’s Disease: a randomized controlled trial. Gastroenterology. 2013;145:758–65.e2. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.04.048. quiz e14-5.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2013.04.048) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23644079/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gastroenterology&title=Early%20administration%20of%20azathioprine%20vs%20conventional%20management%20of%20Crohn%E2%80%99s%20Disease:%20a%20randomized%20controlled%20trial&author=J%20Cosnes&volume=145&publication_year=2013&pages=758-65.e2&pmid=23644079&doi=10.1053/j.gastro.2013.04.048&)

5. Chaparro M, et al. Safety of Thiopurine Therapy in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Long-term Follow-up Study of 3931 Patients. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2013;19:1–7. doi: 10.1097/MIB.0b013e318281f28f.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/MIB.0b013e318281f28f) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23665964/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Inflamm%20Bowel%20Dis&title=Safety%20of%20Thiopurine%20Therapy%20in%20Inflammatory%20Bowel%20Disease:%20Long-term%20Follow-up%20Study%20of%203931%20Patients&author=M%20Chaparro&volume=19&publication_year=2013&pages=1-7&pmid=23665964&doi=10.1097/MIB.0b013e318281f28f&)

6. Gearry RB, Barclay ML, Burt MJ, Collett JA, Chapman BA. Thiopurine drug adverse effects in a population of New Zealand patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2004;13:563–7. doi: 10.1002/pds.926.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/pds.926) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15317038/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacoepidemiol%20Drug%20Saf&title=Thiopurine%20drug%20adverse%20effects%20in%20a%20population%20of%20New%20Zealand%20patients%20with%20inflammatory%20bowel%20disease&author=RB%20Gearry&author=ML%20Barclay&author=MJ%20Burt&author=JA%20Collett&author=BA%20Chapman&volume=13&publication_year=2004&pages=563-7&pmid=15317038&doi=10.1002/pds.926&)

7. Daly AK, et al. HLA-B*5701 genotype is a major determinant of drug-induced liver injury due to flucloxacillin. Nat Genet. 2009;41:816–819. doi: 10.1038/ng.379.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.379) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19483685/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=HLA-B*5701%20genotype%20is%20a%20major%20determinant%20of%20drug-induced%20liver%20injury%20due%20to%20flucloxacillin&author=AK%20Daly&volume=41&publication_year=2009&pages=816-819&pmid=19483685&doi=10.1038/ng.379&)

8. Mallal S, et al. HLA-B*5701 screening for hypersensitivity to abacavir. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:568–579. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0706135.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0706135) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18256392/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N%20Engl%20J%20Med&title=HLA-B*5701%20screening%20for%20hypersensitivity%20to%20abacavir&author=S%20Mallal&volume=358&publication_year=2008&pages=568-579&pmid=18256392&doi=10.1056/NEJMoa0706135&)

9. Gallagher RM, et al. Development and inter-rater reliability of the Liverpool adverse drug reaction causality assessment tool. PLoS One. 2011;6:e28096. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028096.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0028096) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3237416/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22194808/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20One&title=Development%20and%20inter-rater%20reliability%20of%20the%20Liverpool%20adverse%20drug%20reaction%20causality%20assessment%20tool&author=RM%20Gallagher&volume=6&publication_year=2011&pages=e28096&pmid=22194808&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0028096&)

10. WTCCC. Genome-wide association study of 14,000 cases of seven common diseases and 3,000 shared controls. Nature. 2007;447:661–678. doi: 10.1038/nature05911.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05911) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2719288/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17554300/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=Genome-wide%20association%20study%20of%2014,000%20cases%20of%20seven%20common%20diseases%20and%203,000%20shared%20controls&volume=447&publication_year=2007&pages=661-678&pmid=17554300&doi=10.1038/nature05911&)

11. Barrett JC, et al. Genome-wide association study of ulcerative colitis identifies three new susceptibility loci, including the HNF4A region. Nat Genet. 2009;41:1330–1334. doi: 10.1038/ng.483.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.483) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2812019/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19915572/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=Genome-wide%20association%20study%20of%20ulcerative%20colitis%20identifies%20three%20new%20susceptibility%20loci,%20including%20the%20HNF4A%20region&author=JC%20Barrett&volume=41&publication_year=2009&pages=1330-1334&pmid=19915572&doi=10.1038/ng.483&)

12. Abecasis GR, et al. A map of human genome variation from population-scale sequencing. Nature. 2010;467:1061–73. doi: 10.1038/nature09534.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09534) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3042601/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20981092/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=A%20map%20of%20human%20genome%20variation%20from%20population-scale%20sequencing&author=GR%20Abecasis&volume=467&publication_year=2010&pages=1061-73&pmid=20981092&doi=10.1038/nature09534&)

13. Howie B, Fuchsberger C, Stephens M, Marchini J, Abecasis GR. Fast and accurate genotype imputation in genome-wide association studies through prephasing. Nat Genet. 2012;44:955–959. doi: 10.1038/ng.2354.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2354) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3696580/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22820512/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=Fast%20and%20accurate%20genotype%20imputation%20in%20genome-wide%20association%20studies%20through%20prephasing&author=B%20Howie&author=C%20Fuchsberger&author=M%20Stephens&author=J%20Marchini&author=GR%20Abecasis&volume=44&publication_year=2012&pages=955-959&pmid=22820512&doi=10.1038/ng.2354&)

14. Jia X, et al. Imputing amino acid polymorphisms in human leukocyte antigens. PLoS One. 2013;8:e64683. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064683.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0064683) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3675122/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23762245/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20One&title=Imputing%20amino%20acid%20polymorphisms%20in%20human%20leukocyte%20antigens&author=X%20Jia&volume=8&publication_year=2013&pages=e64683&pmid=23762245&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0064683&)

15. Ahmad T, et al. The molecular classification of the clinical manifestations of Crohn’s disease. Gastroenterology. 2002;122:854–866. doi: 10.1053/gast.2002.32413.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1053/gast.2002.32413) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11910336/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gastroenterology&title=The%20molecular%20classification%20of%20the%20clinical%20manifestations%20of%20Crohn%E2%80%99s%20disease&author=T%20Ahmad&volume=122&publication_year=2002&pages=854-866&pmid=11910336&doi=10.1053/gast.2002.32413&)

16. Tilney NL, Collins JJ, Wilson RE. Hemorrhagic pancreatitis. A fatal complication of renal transplantation. N Engl J Med. 1966;274:1051–7. doi: 10.1056/NEJM196605122741903.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM196605122741903) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/5326140/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N%20Engl%20J%20Med&title=Hemorrhagic%20pancreatitis.%20A%20fatal%20complication%20of%20renal%20transplantation&author=NL%20Tilney&author=JJ%20Collins&author=RE%20Wilson&volume=274&publication_year=1966&pages=1051-7&pmid=5326140&doi=10.1056/NEJM196605122741903&)

17. Nogueira JR, Freedman MA. Acute pancreatitis as a complication of Imuran therapy in regional enteritis. Gastroenterology. 1972;62:1040–1.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/5029069/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gastroenterology&title=Acute%20pancreatitis%20as%20a%20complication%20of%20Imuran%20therapy%20in%20regional%20enteritis&author=JR%20Nogueira&author=MA%20Freedman&volume=62&publication_year=1972&pages=1040-1&pmid=5029069&)

18. Marinaki AM, et al. Adverse drug reactions to azathioprine therapy are associated with polymorphism in the gene encoding inosine triphosphate pyrophosphatase (ITPase) Pharmacogenetics. 2004;14:181–187. doi: 10.1097/00008571-200403000-00006.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/00008571-200403000-00006) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15167706/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenetics&title=Adverse%20drug%20reactions%20to%20azathioprine%20therapy%20are%20associated%20with%20polymorphism%20in%20the%20gene%20encoding%20inosine%20triphosphate%20pyrophosphatase%20(ITPase)&author=AM%20Marinaki&volume=14&publication_year=2004&pages=181-187&pmid=15167706&doi=10.1097/00008571-200403000-00006&)

19. Illing PT, Vivian JP, Purcell AW, Rossjohn J, McCluskey J. Human leukocyte antigen-associated drug hypersensitivity. Curr Opin Immunol. 2013;25:81–9. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2012.10.002.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coi.2012.10.002) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23141566/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Opin%20Immunol&title=Human%20leukocyte%20antigen-associated%20drug%20hypersensitivity&author=PT%20Illing&author=JP%20Vivian&author=AW%20Purcell&author=J%20Rossjohn&author=J%20McCluskey&volume=25&publication_year=2013&pages=81-9&pmid=23141566&doi=10.1016/j.coi.2012.10.002&)

20. Kindmark a, et al. Genome-wide pharmacogenetic investigation of a hepatic adverse event without clinical signs of immunopathology suggests an underlying immune pathogenesis. Pharmacogenomics J. 2008;8:186–95. doi: 10.1038/sj.tpj.6500458.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.tpj.6500458) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17505501/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics%20J&title=Genome-wide%20pharmacogenetic%20investigation%20of%20a%20hepatic%20adverse%20event%20without%20clinical%20signs%20of%20immunopathology%20suggests%20an%20underlying%20immune%20pathogenesis&author=a%20Kindmark&volume=8&publication_year=2008&pages=186-95&pmid=17505501&doi=10.1038/sj.tpj.6500458&)

21. Spraggs CF, et al. HLA-DQA1*02:01 is a major risk factor for lapatinib-induced hepatotoxicity in women with advanced breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29:667–73. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.31.3197.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2010.31.3197) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21245432/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=HLA-DQA1*02:01%20is%20a%20major%20risk%20factor%20for%20lapatinib-induced%20hepatotoxicity%20in%20women%20with%20advanced%20breast%20cancer&author=CF%20Spraggs&volume=29&publication_year=2011&pages=667-73&pmid=21245432&doi=10.1200/JCO.2010.31.3197&)

22. Illing PT, et al. Immune self-reactivity triggered by drug-modified HLA-peptide repertoire. Nature. 2012;486:554–8. doi: 10.1038/nature11147.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11147) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22722860/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=Immune%20self-reactivity%20triggered%20by%20drug-modified%20HLA-peptide%20repertoire&author=PT%20Illing&volume=486&publication_year=2012&pages=554-8&pmid=22722860&doi=10.1038/nature11147&)

23. Badalov N, et al. Drug-induced acute pancreatitis: an evidence-based review. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2007;5:648–661. doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2006.11.023.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2006.11.023) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17395548/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Gastroenterol%20Hepatol&title=Drug-induced%20acute%20pancreatitis:%20an%20evidence-based%20review&author=N%20Badalov&volume=5&publication_year=2007&pages=648-661&pmid=17395548&doi=10.1016/j.cgh.2006.11.023&)

24. Grant RL. Converting an odds ratio to a range of plausible relative risks for better communication of research findings. BMJ. 2014;348:f7450–f7450. doi: 10.1136/bmj.f7450.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.f7450) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24464277/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMJ&title=Converting%20an%20odds%20ratio%20to%20a%20range%20of%20plausible%20relative%20risks%20for%20better%20communication%20of%20research%20findings&author=RL%20Grant&volume=348&publication_year=2014&pages=f7450-f7450&pmid=24464277&doi=10.1136/bmj.f7450&)

25. Oliphant A, Barker DL, Stuelpnagel JR, Chee MS. BeadArray technology: enabling an accurate, cost-effective approach to high-throughput genotyping. Biotechniques. 2002;(Suppl):56–8. 60–1.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12083399/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biotechniques&title=BeadArray%20technology:%20enabling%20an%20accurate,%20cost-effective%20approach%20to%20high-throughput%20genotyping&author=A%20Oliphant&author=DL%20Barker&author=JR%20Stuelpnagel&author=MS%20Chee&issue=Suppl&publication_year=2002&pages=56-8&pmid=12083399&)

26. Goldstein JI, et al. zCall: a rare variant caller for array-based genotyping: genetics and population analysis. Bioinformatics. 2012;28:2543–5. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts479.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts479) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3463112/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22843986/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=zCall:%20a%20rare%20variant%20caller%20for%20array-based%20genotyping:%20genetics%20and%20population%20analysis&author=JI%20Goldstein&volume=28&publication_year=2012&pages=2543-5&pmid=22843986&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/bts479&)

27. Barrett JC, et al. Genome-wide association defines more than 30 distinct susceptibility loci for Crohn’s disease. Nat Genet. 2008;40:955–962. doi: 10.1038/NG.175.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/NG.175) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2574810/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18587394/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=Genome-wide%20association%20defines%20more%20than%2030%20distinct%20susceptibility%20loci%20for%20Crohn%E2%80%99s%20disease&author=JC%20Barrett&volume=40&publication_year=2008&pages=955-962&pmid=18587394&doi=10.1038/NG.175&)

28. Anderson CA, et al. Meta-analysis identifies 29 additional ulcerative colitis risk loci, increasing the number of confirmed associations to 47. Nat Genet. 2011;43:246–252. doi: 10.1038/ng.764.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.764) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3084597/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21297633/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=Meta-analysis%20identifies%2029%20additional%20ulcerative%20colitis%20risk%20loci,%20increasing%20the%20number%20of%20confirmed%20associations%20to%2047&author=CA%20Anderson&volume=43&publication_year=2011&pages=246-252&pmid=21297633&doi=10.1038/ng.764&)

29. Yang J, Lee SH, Goddard ME, Visscher PM. GCTA: a tool for genome-wide complex trait analysis. Am J Hum Genet. 2011;88:76–82. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.011.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.011) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3014363/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21167468/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Hum%20Genet&title=GCTA:%20a%20tool%20for%20genome-wide%20complex%20trait%20analysis&author=J%20Yang&author=SH%20Lee&author=ME%20Goddard&author=PM%20Visscher&volume=88&publication_year=2011&pages=76-82&pmid=21167468&doi=10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.011&)

30. Manichaikul A, et al. Robust relationship inference in genome-wide association studies. Bioinformatics. 2010;26:2867–73. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq559.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btq559) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3025716/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20926424/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=Robust%20relationship%20inference%20in%20genome-wide%20association%20studies&author=A%20Manichaikul&volume=26&publication_year=2010&pages=2867-73&pmid=20926424&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btq559&)

31. Sebastiani P, et al. Retraction. Science. 2011;333:404. doi: 10.1126/science.333.6041.404-a.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.333.6041.404-a) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21778381/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=Retraction&author=P%20Sebastiani&volume=333&publication_year=2011&pages=404&pmid=21778381&doi=10.1126/science.333.6041.404-a&)

32. Li Y, Willer CJ, Ding J, Scheet P, Abecasis GR. MaCH: using sequence and genotype data to estimate haplotypes and unobserved genotypes. Genet Epidemiol. 2010;34:816–34. doi: 10.1002/gepi.20533.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/gepi.20533) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3175618/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21058334/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genet%20Epidemiol&title=MaCH:%20using%20sequence%20and%20genotype%20data%20to%20estimate%20haplotypes%20and%20unobserved%20genotypes&author=Y%20Li&author=CJ%20Willer&author=J%20Ding&author=P%20Scheet&author=GR%20Abecasis&volume=34&publication_year=2010&pages=816-34&pmid=21058334&doi=10.1002/gepi.20533&)

33. Purcell S, et al. PLINK: a tool set for whole-genome association and population-based linkage analyses. Am J Hum Genet. 2007;81:559–575. doi: 10.1086/519795.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/519795) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1950838/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17701901/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Hum%20Genet&title=PLINK:%20a%20tool%20set%20for%20whole-genome%20association%20and%20population-based%20linkage%20analyses&author=S%20Purcell&volume=81&publication_year=2007&pages=559-575&pmid=17701901&doi=10.1086/519795&)

34. Scally SW, et al. A molecular basis for the association of the HLA-DRB1 locus, citrullination, and rheumatoid arthritis. J Exp Med. 2013;210:2569–82. doi: 10.1084/jem.20131241.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20131241) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3832918/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24190431/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Exp%20Med&title=A%20molecular%20basis%20for%20the%20association%20of%20the%20HLA-DRB1%20locus,%20citrullination,%20and%20rheumatoid%20arthritis&author=SW%20Scally&volume=210&publication_year=2013&pages=2569-82&pmid=24190431&doi=10.1084/jem.20131241&)

35. Morris GM, et al. AutoDock4 and AutoDockTools4: Automated docking with selective receptor flexibility. J Comput Chem. 2009;30:2785–2791. doi: 10.1002/jcc.21256.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcc.21256) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2760638/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19399780/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Comput%20Chem&title=AutoDock4%20and%20AutoDockTools4:%20Automated%20docking%20with%20selective%20receptor%20flexibility&author=GM%20Morris&volume=30&publication_year=2009&pages=2785-2791&pmid=19399780&doi=10.1002/jcc.21256&)

36. Trott O, Olson AJ. AutoDock Vina: improving the speed and accuracy of docking with a new scoring function, efficient optimization, and multithreading. J Comput Chem. 2010;31:455–461. doi: 10.1002/jcc.21334.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcc.21334) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3041641/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19499576/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Comput%20Chem&title=AutoDock%20Vina:%20improving%20the%20speed%20and%20accuracy%20of%20docking%20with%20a%20new%20scoring%20function,%20efficient%20optimization,%20and%20multithreading&author=O%20Trott&author=AJ%20Olson&volume=31&publication_year=2010&pages=455-461&pmid=19499576&doi=10.1002/jcc.21334&)
