# Lack of Association between Opioid-Receptor Genotypes and Smoking Cessation Outcomes in a Randomized, Controlled Naltrexone Trial

## Metadata
**Authors:** Daniel J O Roche, Constantine J Trela, Maria Argos, Farzana Jasmine, Muhammad G Kibriya, Habibul Ahsan, Andrea C King
**Journal:** Alcohol and Alcoholism (Oxford, Oxfordshire)
**Date:** 2019 Jun 17
**DOI:** [10.1093/alcalc/agz046](https://doi.org/10.1093/alcalc/agz046)
**PMID:** 31206155
**PMCID:** PMC7963143
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7963143/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7963143/pdf/alcalc_54_5_559.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7963143/pdf/alcalc_54_5_559.pdf)

## Abstract

No significant associations were found between opioid-receptor gene single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and naltrexone’s effects on the clinical trial endpoints of smoking quit rate, weight gain, and heavy drinking behavior.

### Aims

The present study examined how variation in mu- (*OPRM1*), kappa- (*OPRK*), and delta- (*OPRD*) opioid receptor genes may influence the efficacy of naltrexone in the context of a smoking cessation trial.

### Methods

The study’s primary objective was to examine the association of the Asn40Asp *OPRM1* single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) with naltrexone’s effects on smoking quit rate, weight gain, and heavy drinking behavior during a double-blind, randomized clinical trial in 280 adult DSM-IV nicotine-dependent participants. The secondary goal of the study was to examine the relationship of 20 additional SNPs of *OPRM1*, *OPRK*, and *OPRD* with the aforementioned outcomes.

### Results

Results indicated a null association between any opioid-receptor gene SNP and naltrexone’s effects on smoking quit rate, weight gain, and heavy drinking behavior in this sample of nicotine dependent participants.

### Conclusions

In sum, these results do not suggest that genetic variation in opioid-receptors is related to treatment responses to naltrexone in a smoking cessation trial.

## Introduction

Naltrexone is an opioid-receptor antagonist that is Federal Drug Administration (FDA)-approved for treatment of opioid and alcohol dependence and has frequently been investigated for smoking cessation. Support for the latter indication has been mixed, culminating with a recent meta-analysis failing to find evidence that naltrexone is an effective stand-alone pharmacotherapy in smoking cessation ([David et al., 2013](#agz046C7)). However, several individual studies have shown that naltrexone (vs. placebo) may be an efficacious augmentation strategy with the nicotine patch, with the combination producing end-of-treatment increases in smoking quit rates and reduction of smoking urge, drinking behaviors, and cessation-related weight gain in DSM-IV nicotine dependent individuals ([O’Malley et al., 2009](#agz046C29); [King et al., 2012a](#agz046C17), [2006](#agz046C20), [2013](#agz046C19); [Fridberg et al., 2014](#agz046C8)). Further, recent human laboratory findings suggest naltrexone combined with varenicline may be an effective treatment strategy for individuals with comorbid alcohol and tobacco use disorders ([Ray et al., 2014](#agz046C32); [Roche et al., 2015](#agz046C38), [2016](#agz046C40)), highlighting the continued importance of studying the use of naltrexone in smoking cessation.

Although naltrexone is an approved medication for alcoholism, several studies have demonstrated that naltrexone’s pharmacological effects and treatment responses for this indication are highly variable at the individual level ([Kranzler and Kirk, 2001](#agz046C22); [Weerts et al., 2008](#agz046C45)). Numerous investigations have focused on elucidating the source of this heterogeneity ([Garbutt et al., 2016](#agz046C9)), but no reliable predictors of naltrexone treatment outcomes have been characterized. Genetic variation has been identified as one potential source of individual variability in the treatment of addiction, and, accordingly, greater emphasis has recently been placed on implementing pharmacogenetic approaches in alcohol and smoking studies with naltrexone ([Ray et al., 2010](#agz046C31); [Roche and Ray, 2015](#agz046C39)). It has been hypothesized that identifying genetic variants associated with naltrexone treatment outcomes may increase the understanding of the mechanisms underlying successful pharmacotherapy and, ultimately, lead to greater gains in realizing the goal of personalized medicine ([Kranzler and McKay, 2012](#agz046C23)).

Naltrexone binds to mu-, kappa-, and delta-opioid receptors with varying affinities ([Toll et al., 1998](#agz046C44)). As such, laboratory and clinical trial research has examined the role of opioid receptor variants in naltrexone’s effects on alcohol drinking behaviors. As reviewed elsewhere ([Ray et al., 2010](#agz046C31); [Roche and Ray, 2015](#agz046C39)), the majority of such studies have focused on a particular single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of the mu-opioid receptor gene (*OPRM1*; rs1799971; commonly known as Asn40Asp) with mixed results. While meta-analyses of retrospective pharmacogenetic trials have indicated a potential modest role for the Asp40 allele as a biomarker of naltrexone’s reduction in heavy drinking ([Jonas et al., 2014](#agz046C15)), recent prospective trials have not supported the hypothesis that this allele moderates naltrexone’s treatment effects for alcoholism ([Oslin et al., 2015](#agz046C28); [Schacht et al., 2017](#agz046C42); [Ray et al., 2018](#agz046C33)). Relatively few studies have examined the effects of delta- (*OPRD*) and kappa-opioid receptor gene (*OPRK*) variants on naltrexone responsivity: one laboratory study reported that *OPRK* and *OPRD* SNPs moderate naltrexone’s effects on acute subjective response to alcohol in heavy drinkers ([Ashenhurst et al., 2012](#agz046C2)), but a larger clinical trial in alcohol dependent individuals found no relationship between variation in these genes and naltrexone’s ability to reduce heavy drinking ([Gelernter et al., 2007](#agz046C10)). Given these mixed findings, more studies are needed to determine the viability of naltrexone pharmacogenetics in alcohol as well as other addiction treatments.

Nicotine dependence is a highly heritable and complex phenotype that is produced by numerous genetic determinants ([Bidwell et al., 2016](#agz046C4)). Yet, relatively few studies have examined pharmacogenetic determinants of smoking cessation treatment outcomes in a randomized clinical trial. Of those that have, most studied the relationship between a small number of candidate genes and the outcomes of treatment with nicotine replacement therapy, bupropion, and/or varenicline ([Sarginson et al., 2011](#agz046C41); [Bousman et al., 2012](#agz046C5); [King et al., 2012b](#agz046C21)). To date, despite several laboratory and clinical trials suggesting modest associations of *OPRM1* with smoking related behaviors, nicotine dependence, and smoking cessation ([Ray et al., 2006](#agz046C35); [Bernardi et al., 2016](#agz046C3); [Lechner et al., 2016](#agz046C24)), no study has examined the influence of opioid receptor variation on the efficacy of naltrexone in a smoking cessation study.

The current study sought to examine the association of *OPRM1*, *OPRK1*, and *OPRD1* variants with response to naltrexone augmentation of nicotine patch outcomes in a double-blinded randomized smoking cessation trial in adult nicotine-dependent participants. In the main clinical trial, naltrexone (vs. placebo) increased smoking cessation quit rates and decreased the number of cigarettes smoked through the end of treatment at 12 weeks. Naltrexone also reduced the amount of weight gained during treatment ([King et al., 2012a](#agz046C17)), and in a combined analyses with data from O’Malley and colleagues ([O’Malley et al., 2009](#agz046C29)), naltrexone’s reduction of cessation-related weight gain was observed in women one year after the quit date ([King et al., 2013](#agz046C19)). As the parent trial was a smoking cessation trial, alcohol consumption was not a primary consideration in recruitment and enrollment (apart from excluding individuals with alcohol dependence) nor a primary study endpoint; further, participants did not receive specific treatment for their alcohol use. Despite this, naltrexone was more effective in reducing both smoking and alcohol drinking behavior in heavy drinking smokers than in moderate-to-light and non-drinkers ([Fridberg et al., 2014](#agz046C8)), replicating earlier findings in an independent sample ([King et al., 2009](#agz046C18)). Finally, it was recently demonstrated that race and genetic ancestry may influence the effects of naltrexone on smoking quit rate in this sample ([Bress et al., 2015](#agz046C6)), but the moderating role of opioid receptor SNPs on the trial outcomes was not investigated. Thus, the primary aim of this retrospective study was to evaluate associations between the Asp40 allele and the effect of naltrexone on the main treatment outcomes of the parent smoking cessation clinical trial, namely smoking quit rate, weight gain, and heavy drinking episodes. Given the putative association of the endogenous opioid system and naltrexone’s mechanism of action, the secondary aim was to explore the associations of these outcomes with 20 additional SNPs in *OPRD1* (*n* = 3 SNPs), *OPRK1* (*n* = 4 SNPs), and *OPRM1* (*n* = 13 SNPs). These SNPS were chosen because they were previously examined in genetic association studies of naltrexone responsivity, nicotine dependence, alcohol dependence, or general substance use problems (L. [Xuei et al., 2006](#agz046C46); [Zhang et al., 2006a](#agz046C48), [2006b](#agz046C50); [Zhang et al., 2008](#agz046C49); [Ashenhurst et al., 2012](#agz046C2)).

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Ethics statement

All participants provided written, informed consent prior to study participation. The study was approved by The University of Chicago Institutional Review Board and conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.

### Study participants

This study included 280 individuals who were successfully genotyped from the total 315 smokers randomized in the main trial ([King et al., 2012a](#agz046C17)). All participants consented to having a blood sample extracted for DNA as part of study enrollment, but samples for 35 participants (11%) had either low DNA concentration (*n* = 15) or were excluded due to low genotype call rates (<95%; *n* = 20). Participants that were excluded from genetic analyses for these reasons did not significantly differ in baseline characteristics from those who were included (data not shown). Any differences in the sample characteristics reported in Table [1](#agz046TB1) between the parent study and current study were due to the smaller overall sample size in the present analysis.

### Table 1.

| Characteristic | Placebo (n = 138) | Naltrexone (n = 142) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Male, N (%) | 64 (46.4) | 65 (45.8) |
| Age, mean (SD), y | 42.7 (10.8) | 41.4 (11.5) |
| Education (years completed), mean (SD) | 15.1 (2.2) | 15.1 (2.4) |
| Body mass index, mean (SD), kg/m2 | 27.0 (4.7) | 27.3 (4.4) |
| Race, N (%) |   |   |
| Caucasian | 82 (59.4) | 81 (57.0) |
| African American | 49 (35.5) | 50 (35.2) |
| Other | 7 (5.1) | 11 (7.8) |
| Cigarettes per day, mean (SD) | 18.6 (6.1) | 17.7 (5.1) |
| Age of smoking initiation, mean (SD) | 17.8 (3.4) | 17.9 (4.7) |
| No. past quit attempts (>12 h), mean (SD) | 4.2 (5.7) | 4.5 (9.3) |
| Nicotine dependence (FTND), mean (SD) | 5.4 (1.8) | 5.1 (1.8) |
| Current alcohol drinker, N (%) | 121 (87.7) | 124 (87.3) |
| Heavy drinkers, N (%) | 33 (27.2) | 22 (25.0) |
| Drinks per week at baseline, mean (SD)a | 10.2 (10.5) | 7.5 (7.8) |
| Heavy drinking days per week at baseline, mean (SD)a | 1.7 (2.2) | 1.6 (2.3) |
| Quit rate, N (%) | 43 (31.2) | 57 (40.1) |
| Weight gain at 12 weeks in lbs. | 5.1 (5.7) | 3.3 (5.7) |
| Asn40Asp rs1799971 frequency |   |   |
| AA | 106 (77.9) | 106 (75.2) |
| AG | 29 (21.3) | 30 (21.3) |
| GG | 1 (0.7) | 5 (3.5) |

Table 1 Caption: Baseline characteristics of study sample

Study candidates were interviewed by telephone for main eligibility criteria ([King et al., 2012a](#agz046C17)), and those interested and eligible for further screening were invited to the clinic for a full screening battery where they provided written informed consent. Consented participants completed study questionnaires and interviews and then received a brief physical examination including the collection of biological samples (blood and urine). Recruited and enrolled participants were nicotine dependent individuals who wanted to quit smoking. Apart from exclusion for alcohol dependence (described below), quantity or frequency of alcohol consumption and diagnosis of alcohol use disorder were not a primary consideration in participant recruitment or screening. For further details on screening, see ([King et al., 2012a](#agz046C17)).

Participants were eligible if they were 18 to 65 years old, smoked 10 to 40 cigarettes daily for at least two years, had a body mass index of 19 to 38 kg/m^2^, had a breath carbon monoxide reading of at least 10 ppm and a urinary Nicalert® reading ≥500 ng/mL cotinine, confirming regular smoking. Candidates were excluded if they reported a past-year history of a major medical or psychiatric disorder, substance dependence (including alcohol dependence but excepting nicotine) or a lifetime diagnosis of opioid abuse or dependence, schizophrenia, bipolar, or obsessive-compulsive disorder, use of opioid or psychotropic medications, elevated hepatic transaminase concentrations (>2.5 SD of the reference range), or were unable to read or write English. Breastfeeding or pregnant women were also excluded.

### Procedures

Participants were randomly assigned by computer to one of the two treatment conditions (naltrexone or placebo), stratified by sex. Participants and study staff were blinded to treatment assignment. The study included 10 visits, with the first six visits occurring weekly starting two weeks prior to the designated smoking quit date and ending four weeks after the quit date. The last four visits occurred every other week from weeks 6 to 12. At each visit, participants completed a Timeline Follow Back (TLFB) interview to quantify daily cigarette and alcohol use, provided biochemical confirmation of their smoking status by expired air carbon monoxide breath tests (≤10 ppm to confirm smoking cessation), and were weighed. At the first six visits, participants received counseling sessions that were focused on smoking cessation and not drinking behaviors. At 26 and 52 weeks after the quit date, participants completed a telephone follow-up that included a TLFB of daily cigarette use for the preceding four weeks. Participants who reported being smoke-free in the past seven days were asked to attend an in-person visit for carbon monoxide verification; weight gain was also measured at this time. Follow-up rates were high and did not differ by medication group (telephone follow-up at 26-weeks, 99% completion in both groups; at 52-weeks, 98% placebo vs 96% naltrexone; in-person follow-up of abstainers at 26-weeks, 95% vs 89%, respectively; at 52-weeks, 92% vs 88%).

Naltrexone hydrochloride (Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals, Hazelwood, MO) or placebo tablets were initiated 6 days before the quit date. The dosing gradually increased over the first three days, from 12.5 mg on the first day, followed by 25 mg for two days, and then at 50 mg daily, which continued throughout active treatment. Medication was discontinued at the last study visit, twelve weeks after the designated quit date. All participants received open-label transdermal nicotine patch treatment (Nicoderm CQ; GlaxoSmithKline, London, UK) that was initiated on the quit date at 21 mg/d and continued for two weeks, then reduced to 14 mg and seven mg daily, respectively, for the third and fourth weeks. Group assignment and early naltrexone compliance were verified via urine and saliva samples obtained on the quit date with details provided in ([King et al., 2012a](#agz046C17)). In this study, self-reported pill and patch adherence was ≥75%, and there were no medication group or sex differences in compliance.

### Genotyping

Genotyping was carried out using a custom panel designed for Illumina’s GoldenGate-based BeadXpress platform. A total of 21 SNPs was selected as per the genomic regions of interest (described below). As starting material, 250 ng of genomic DNA was used as per Illumina BeadXpress protocol. TeCan robotics was used for automation of sample processing. The 96-well plates were read on a BeadXpress reader. The raw intensity data was processed in BeadStudio Version 3 software using GoldenGate genotyping module with Gen Call threshold at 0.25. For genotype calls, clusters were generated using all the genotyped samples. As stated in the introduction, our primary aim sought to evaluate the relationship between the Asn40Asp SNP and the effect of naltrexone on smoking quit rate, weight gain, and heavy drinking behavior. The secondary aim was to explore the associations of these outcomes with 20 additional SNPs in *OPRD1* (*n* = 3 SNPs), *OPRK1* (*n* = 4 SNPs), and *OPRM1* (*n* = 13 SNPs).

### Study endpoints

The smoking quit rate was based on ‘prolonged abstinence,’ defined as not smoking even a puff through the 12 weeks of treatment and allowing for a one-week grace period after quit day ([Hughes et al., 2003](#agz046C14)). Weight gain was calculated as the change in weight [in pounds (lbs.)] from the two pre-treatment baseline visits (average of visits one and two) to the end of treatment (week 12). Weight gain and quit rate were also assessed 26- and 52-weeks after the quit date. Heavy drinking days (five or more drinks on an occasion for men, four or more for women) and total drinks throughout the treatment period were calculated from the TLFB interview obtained at each visit.

### Statistical analyses

Demographic variables were analyzed by chi-squared tests. Due to anticipated additive allele effects, SNPs were coded as a continuous variable indicating the number of minor alleles (0, 1, 2). Gene × treatment assignment (G × TRTM) interactions were evaluated for four trial outcomes, including quit rate over 12-week treatment period, weight gain at 12 weeks, heavy drinking days, and total number of drinks (the latter two variables were collected in current drinkers only). Statistical analyses were performed using the Statistical Analysis System, release 9.3 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, North Carolina). Weight gain at 12 weeks was log transformed to approximate a normal distribution and analyzed as a linear regression. Cox proportional hazards regression models were used to assess G × TRTM interaction for quit rates over the 12 weeks of treatment. Heavy drinking days and total number of drinks among drinkers were analyzed as count-variables. Due to the presence of overdispersion in the distribution, a negative-binomial regression was used to assess the G × TRTM interaction for the drinking-related models. Tests for interaction in all models were assessed via the *P-*value of the G × TRTM interaction term. All models were adjusted for sex, self-reported race (Caucasian, African American, Other), and age (years). Two separate significance thresholds were set to test the two study aims. A significance threshold of *P* = 0.05 was set for the primary aim of examining the association of Asn40Asp (rs1799971) with the treatment outcomes. To examine the effect of the 20 remaining opioid receptor SNPs on response to naltrexone, a Bonferroni correction were performed to account for multiple testing, resulting in a *P*-value threshold of [=0.05/20] < 0.0025 for the secondary aim.

A series of secondary, exploratory models were tested in addition to the primary analyses. These models were the same as used in the primary analysis but included drinking status based upon drinking patterns over the prior six months as an additional covariate (heavy drinking: ≥ two heavy drinking episodes per month; light/moderate drinking: < two heavy drinking episodes per month, and non-drinking: no alcohol consumed over the past 6 months; [Fridberg et al., 2014](#agz046C8)). Additional supplemental models examined data for quit rate and weight gain that was available for long-term follow-up periods of 26-weeks and 52-weeks.

## RESULTS

The baseline characteristics of study participants by treatment assignment are shown in **Table 1**. The naltrexone and placebo groups were not significantly different on sex, race, or age (naltrexone arm mean age = 41.4 ± 11.5 versus placebo arm mean age = 42.7 ± 10.8; *P* = 0.30).

All G × TRTM results for smoking quit rate, weight gain, heavy drinking days, and total drinks are reported in **Table 2**. The Asn40Asp SNP (rs1799971) was not associated with the effects of naltrexone on smoking quit rate (*P* = 0.32), weight gain (*p* = 0.90), heavy drinking days (*P* = 0.96), or total drinks (*P* = 0.26). In the secondary analysis, *OPRM1* SNPs rs3823010 and rs524731 were nominally associated with changes in heaving drinking behavior in response to naltrexone (*p*s = or < 0.05), though these relationships were far from approaching the Bonferroni corrected *P*-value threshold.

### Table 2.

| Gene | SNP |   |   | Quit rate at 12 weeks |  | Weight gain at 12 weeks |  | Heavy drinking days |  | Total drinks |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   |   | Allele | AF | Effect estimate | P-value | Effect estimate | P-value | Effect estimate | P-value | Effect estimate | P-value |
| OPRM1 | rs1799971 | A | 0.87 | 0.74 (0.40, 1.35) | 0.32 | 0.22 (1.69) | 0.90 | 0.02 (0.45) | 0.96 | 0.46 (0.41) | 0.26 |
| rs10485057 | A | 0.58 | 0.94 (0.52, 1.69) | 0.82 | −0.27 (1.52) | 0.86 | 0.67 (0.44) | 0.13 | 0.30 (0.42) | 0.47 |  |
| rs1294092 | G | 0.16 | 0.99 (0.57, 1.70) | 0.97 | 0.01 (1.57) | 1.00 | 0.32 (0.42) | 0.44 | 0.33 (0.37) | 0.38 |  |
| rs1381376 | G | 0.81 | 1.24 (0.72, 2.12) | 0.43 | −0.82 (1.44) | 0.57 | 0.45 (0.41) | 0.27 | 0.16 (0.40) | 0.70 |  |
| rs2075572 | G | 0.49 | 0.84 (0.55, 1.28) | 0.41 | −0.26 (1.17) | 0.83 | −0.05 (0.39) | 0.90 | −0.11 (0.35) | 0.75 |  |
| rs3823010 | A | 0.15 | 0.84 (0.46, 1.52) | 0.57 | 0.02 (1.54) | 0.99 | −0.79 (0.41) | 0.05 | −0.22 (0.41) | 0.58 |  |
| rs495491 | A | 0.64 | 1.19 (0.78, 1.80) | 0.43 | 0.33 (1.09) | 0.76 | −0.03 (0.31) | 0.93 | −0.09 (0.31) | 0.77 |  |
| rs511435 | G | 0.79 | 1.46 (0.88, 2.42) | 0.14 | −0.16 (1.32) | 0.90 | 0.49 (0.38) | 0.20 | 0.05 (0.38) | 0.91 |  |
| rs524731 | A | 0.18 | 0.65 (0.38, 1.14) | 0.14 | 0.66 (1.42) | 0.65 | −0.80 (0.39) | 0.04 | −0.20 (0.38) | 0.60 |  |
| rs548646 | G | 0.61 | 0.83 (0.54, 1.27) | 0.38 | 0.77 (1.20) | 0.52 | 0.40 (0.39) | 0.31 | 0.25 (0.34) | 0.46 |  |
| rs609148 | A | 0.23 | 0.94 (0.57, 1.55) | 0.81 | −0.64 (1.38) | 0.65 | 0.07 (0.38) | 0.85 | −0.02 (0.34) | 0.95 |  |
| rs648893 | G | 0.19 | 1.07 (0.65, 1.78) | 0.79 | −0.71 (1.40) | 0.62 | −0.08 (0.37) | 0.83 | −0.01 (0.34) | 0.98 |  |
| rs9322447 | A | 0.53 | 0.81 (0.54, 1.24) | 0.33 | −0.44 (1.21) | 0.72 | 0.09 (0.36) | 0.80 | −0.01 (0.33) | 0.99 |  |
| rs9479757 | G | 0.88 | 1.00 (0.52, 1.90) | 0.99 | −0.74 (1.65) | 0.65 | 0.78 (0.46) | 0.09 | 0.20 (0.43) | 0.64 |  |
| OPRD1 | rs1042114 | C | 0.09 | 0.80 (0.36,1.76) | 0.58 | −3.57 (2.08) | 0.09 | 0.52 (0.54) | 0.34 | 0.53 (0.51) | 0.29 |
| rs204076 | T | 0.29 | 0.90 (0.57, 1.43) | 0.67 | −0.43 (1.21) | 0.72 | −0.43 (0.35) | 0.22 | −0.29 (0.30) | 0.33 |  |
| rs2298896 | C | 0.36 | 0.82 (0.53, 1.28) | 0.38 | 0.52 (1.22) | 0.67 | −0.004 (0.34) | 0.99 | 0.18 (0.30) | 0.54 |  |
| OPRK1 | rs16918941 | A | 0.08 | 0.95 (0.44, 2.03) | 0.88 | 0.45 (2.24) | 0.84 | 0.46 (0.63) | 0.47 | 0.63 (0.62) | 0.31 |
| rs6473797 | G | 0.36 | 0.96 (0.64, 1.44) | 0.85 | −0.20 (1.09) | 0.86 | −0.27 (0.31) | 0.38 | −0.16 (0.29) | 0.58 |  |
| rs6985606 | A | 0.37 | 0.99 (0.65, 1.51) | 0.96 | 0.32 (1.08) | 0.76 | 0.24 (0.30) | 0.41 | 0.51 (0.29) | 0.08 |  |
| rs997917 | G | 0.42 | 1.02 (0.68, 1.51) | 0.94 | 0.21 (1.06) | 0.85 | −0.57 (0.31) | 0.07 | −0.32 (0.30) | 0.29 |  |

Table 2 Caption: Summary of G × TRTM interactions for opioid receptor variants and smoking cessation outcomes

The inclusion of drinking status (heavy drinking: ≥ two heavy drinking episodes per month; light/moderate drinking: < two heavy drinking episodes per month, and non-drinking) did not alter the pattern of results for the Asn40Asp SNP for quit rate (*P* = 0.74), weight gain (*P* = 0.85), heavy drinking days (*P* = 0.82), or total drinks (*P* = 0.26). When drinking status was included, there were nominal associations between *OPRK1* SNPs rs997917 and 6985606 and response to naltrexone for number of heavy drinking days (*P* = 0.01) and total drinks (*P* = 0.05) respectively, though these were not considered significant after the Bonferroni correction. Lastly, there was no association between the Asn40Asp SNP and response to naltrexone for quit rate (*P*s > 0.33) or weight gain (*P*s > 0.29) at 26- or 52-week follow-up. None of the additional SNPs tested for either long-term follow-up periods surpassed the Bonferroni corrected *P*-value for either weight gain (all *P*s > 0.05) or quit rate (*OPRD1* SNP rs 204076 *P* = 0.01 for 52 weeks; all other *P*s > 0.12).

## DISCUSSION

The present study was the first to examine the relationship between genetic variance in opioid receptors and smoking quit rate, weight gain, and heavy drinking behavior in a double-blind randomized clinical trial of naltrexone for nicotine dependence. The primary study aim tested whether the Asn40Asp SNP influenced the effects of naltrexone on smoking quit rate, weight gain, and heavy drinking. The secondary aim examined variation in 20 SNPs in *OPRM1*, *OPRK1*, and *OPRD1* against these three outcome measures. We failed to observe significant interactions between Asn40Asp or any of the 20 opioid receptor SNPs and the effects of naltrexone on the aforementioned treatment outcome. The present results do not provide evidence that genetic variation in opioid receptors significantly influences smoking-, weight-, or drinking-related treatment responses to naltrexone in a smoking cessation trial.

There is considerable evidence linking the endogenous opioid system to alcohol and nicotine’s mechanisms of action and the development of dependence to both drugs ([Gianoulakis, 2009](#agz046C11)). However, studies attempting to link genetic variation in the endogenous opioid system with alcohol and nicotine acute effects, dependence, and/or treatment outcomes have been mixed. Although *OPRM1* has been associated with nicotine reinforcement, nicotine dependence, and smoking initiation ([Ray et al., 2006](#agz046C35); [Zhang et al., 2006a](#agz046C48), [2006b](#agz046C50)), results of nicotine replacement therapy smoking cessation studies examining the *OPRM1* Asn40Asp SNP have been predominantly negative ([Munafo et al., 2007](#agz046C27); [Ray et al., 2007](#agz046C36)). Similarly, *OPRK1*, *OPRD1*, and *OPRM1* variants have been associated with alcohol acute effects, alcohol dependence, and naltrexone’s ability to affect alcohol response in the laboratory ([Ray and Hutchison, 2007](#agz046C34); [Zhang et al., 2006a](#agz046C48), [2006b](#agz046C50), [2008](#agz046C49); [Ashenhurst et al., 2012](#agz046C2); [Li and Zhang, 2013](#agz046C25); [Hendershot et al., 2014](#agz046C13)), but results from retrospective and prospective naltrexone pharmacogenetic trials for alcoholism have also been decidedly conflicting ([Gelernter et al., 2007](#agz046C10); [Anton et al., 2008](#agz046C1); [O’Malley et al., 2008](#agz046C30); [Oslin et al., 2015](#agz046C28); [Schacht et al., 2017](#agz046C42); [Ray et al., 2018](#agz046C33)). As we found no association between 21 *OPRK1*, *OPRD1*, and *OPRM1* SNPs and naltrexone’s effects on heavy drinking, smoking cessation, and weight gain, the present results are consistent with prior pharmacogenetic trials reporting a lack of interaction between opioid receptor genetic variants and response to naltrexone.

The current results do not rule out the possibility that genetic variation in opioid receptors may influence naltrexone responsivity at some level; yet, when taken in combination with the aforementioned mixed findings, they do suggest that the magnitude of the effects of opioid receptor SNPs may be too small to individually predict naltrexone treatment outcomes in a smoking cessation trial. Such inconsistent findings, particularly related to the Asn40Asp SNP, may be related to the inability of laboratory studies and clinical trials to reliably detect the small effects produced by candidate genes. As with most complex traits, a large number of gene variations with small effect sizes are believed to contribute risk for the development of psychiatric disorders ([Manolio et al., 2009](#agz046C26)), including nicotine and alcohol dependence ([Hart and Kranzler, 2015](#agz046C12)). Thus, it is similarly likely that the Asn40Asp SNP or individual SNPs in other opioid receptor genes only contribute a relatively small effect toward an observable pharmacogenetic interaction with naltrexone. As discussed elsewhere in relation to genetic risk for alcoholism ([Hart and Kranzler, 2015](#agz046C12)), developing alternative approaches that examine gene-gene interactions ([Khadka et al., 2014](#agz046C16)) and/or the cumulative effect of multiple genotypes ([Sun et al., 2015](#agz046C43)) may be needed to advance the field of pharmacogenetics for treatment of substance use disorders.

The presented findings should also be viewed in light of the study’s strengths and limitations. The study had several strengths, including (1) being the first study to examine genetic associations within the context of a randomized clinical trial examining naltrexone for smoking cessation, (2) using a targeted approach for the evaluation of gene-treatment interaction through the selection of candidate SNPs that were identified from published literature and (3) using clinically meaningful treatment endpoints as outcome measures. The primary study limitation was the modest sample size for a pharmacogenetic examination of a clinical trial, which may have in part contributed to the null results of the study. Therefore, replication of the current negative results is needed in a larger pharmacogenetic naltrexone trial with respect to smoking quit rates, drinking behavior, and weight gain. An additional limitation is that analyses were performed in a sample of participants that included multiple racial backgrounds. The racially heterogeneous sample may have contributed to the lack of an observed effect in the Asn40Asp *OPRM1* (rs1799971), as this SNP has a very low prevalence in African-Americans ([Ray and Oslin, 2009](#agz046C37)). While self-reported race was controlled for statistically, a larger sample size would have allowed us to examine genotype effects stratified within each racial group and also evaluate potential heterogeneity of results by race. Finally, it should be noted that, as with most pharmacological treatments for addictive disorders, naltrexone was only moderately effective in reducing smoking and weight gain in the main trial ([King et al., 2012a](#agz046C17)). While these effect sizes were comparable to other naltrexone trials for alcohol dependence and smoking cessation, the modest effects of naltrexone in the main study may have limited our ability to detect pharmacogenetic effects in this follow-up study.

In summary, the primary findings from this study do not support a role for individual opioid receptor SNPs in naltrexone’s efficacy on improving smoking quit rates and decreasing weight gain and hazardous drinking behavior during smoking cessation. However, currently available pharmacological treatments for nicotine and alcohol dependence are only modestly effective, and pharmacogenetics still holds promise as method to optimize response in the treatment of addiction. Future naltrexone clinical trials with larger and more homogenous samples, and potentially employing more powerful analysis techniques that take gene-gene interactions ([Yarosh et al., 2015](#agz046C47)) or cumulative genetic risk ([Hart and Kranzler, 2015](#agz046C12); [Sun et al., 2015](#agz046C43)) into consideration, are needed to replicate the null results presented in this study.

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT

None declared.

## References

1. Anton RF, Oroszi G, O’Malley S, et al. (2008) An evaluation of μ-opioid receptor (OPRM1) as a predictor of naltrexone response in the treatment of alcohol dependence: results from the Combined Pharmacotherapies and Behavioral Interventions for Alcohol Dependence (COMBINE) study. Arch Gen Psychiatry 65:135–44.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.65.2.135) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2666924/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18250251/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Arch%20Gen%20Psychiatry&title=An%20evaluation%20of%20%CE%BC-opioid%20receptor%20(OPRM1)%20as%20a%20predictor%20of%20naltrexone%20response%20in%20the%20treatment%20of%20alcohol%20dependence:%20results%20from%20the%20Combined%20Pharmacotherapies%20and%20Behavioral%20Interventions%20for%20Alcohol%20Dependence%20(COMBINE)%20study&volume=65&publication_year=2008&pages=135-44&pmid=18250251&doi=10.1001/archpsyc.65.2.135&)

2. Ashenhurst JR, Bujarski S, Ray LA. (2012) Delta and kappa opioid receptor polymorphisms influence the effects of naltrexone on subjective responses to alcohol. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 103:253–9.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbb.2012.08.019) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3683577/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22954510/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacol%20Biochem%20Behav&title=Delta%20and%20kappa%20opioid%20receptor%20polymorphisms%20influence%20the%20effects%20of%20naltrexone%20on%20subjective%20responses%20to%20alcohol&volume=103&publication_year=2012&pages=253-9&pmid=22954510&doi=10.1016/j.pbb.2012.08.019&)

3. Bernardi RE, Zohsel K, Hirth N, et al. (2016) A gene-by-sex interaction for nicotine reward: evidence from humanized mice and epidemiology. Transl Psychiatry 6:e861.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/tp.2016.132) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5545715/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27459726/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Transl%20Psychiatry&title=A%20gene-by-sex%20interaction%20for%20nicotine%20reward:%20evidence%20from%20humanized%20mice%20and%20epidemiology&volume=6&publication_year=2016&pages=e861&pmid=27459726&doi=10.1038/tp.2016.132&)

4. Bidwell LC, Palmer RHC, Brick L, et al. (2016) Genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism heritability of nicotine dependence as a multidimensional phenotype. Psychol Med 46:2059–69.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291716000453) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4925274/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27052577/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Psychol%20Med&title=Genome-wide%20single%20nucleotide%20polymorphism%20heritability%20of%20nicotine%20dependence%20as%20a%20multidimensional%20phenotype&volume=46&publication_year=2016&pages=2059-69&pmid=27052577&doi=10.1017/S0033291716000453&)

5. Bousman CA, Rivard C, Haese JD, et al. (2012) Alpha-5 and-3 nicotinic receptor gene variants predict nicotine dependence but not cessation: findings from the COMMIT cohort. Am J Medl Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 159:227–35.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.b.32019) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3262775/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22223462/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Medl%20Genet%20B%20Neuropsychiatr%20Genet&title=Alpha-5%20and-3%20nicotinic%20receptor%20gene%20variants%20predict%20nicotine%20dependence%20but%20not%20cessation:%20findings%20from%20the%20COMMIT%20cohort&volume=159&publication_year=2012&pages=227-35&pmid=22223462&doi=10.1002/ajmg.b.32019&)

6. Bress A, Kittles R, Wing C, et al. (2015) Genetic ancestry as an effect modifier of naltrexone in smoking cessation among African Americans: an analysis of a randomized controlled trial. Pharmacogenet Genomics, 25, 305. 305–312.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0000000000000138) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4413945/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25918964/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenet%20Genomics&volume=25&publication_year=2015&pages=305&pmid=25918964&doi=10.1097/FPC.0000000000000138&)

7. David SP, Lancaster T, Stead LF, et al. (2013) Opioid antagonists for smoking cessation. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 6, CD003086.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD003086) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11687036/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Cochrane%20Database%20of%20Systematic%20Reviews&publication_year=2013&)

8. Fridberg DJ, Cao D, Grant JE, et al. (2014) Naltrexone improves quit rates, attenuates smoking urge, and reduces alcohol use in heavy drinking smokers attempting to quit smoking. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 38:2622–9.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/acer.12513) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4638321/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25335648/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Alcohol%20Clin%20Exp%20Res&title=Naltrexone%20improves%20quit%20rates,%20attenuates%20smoking%20urge,%20and%20reduces%20alcohol%20use%20in%20heavy%20drinking%20smokers%20attempting%20to%20quit%20smoking&volume=38&publication_year=2014&pages=2622-9&pmid=25335648&doi=10.1111/acer.12513&)

9. Garbutt JC, Kampov-Polevoy AB, Kalka-Juhl LS, et al. (2016) Association of the sweet-liking phenotype and craving for alcohol with the response to naltrexone treatment in alcohol dependence: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry 73:1056–63.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2016.2157) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27627782/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=JAMA%20Psychiatry&title=Association%20of%20the%20sweet-liking%20phenotype%20and%20craving%20for%20alcohol%20with%20the%20response%20to%20naltrexone%20treatment%20in%20alcohol%20dependence:%20a%20randomized%20clinical%20trial&volume=73&publication_year=2016&pages=1056-63&pmid=27627782&doi=10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2016.2157&)

10. Gelernter J, Gueorguieva R, Kranzler HR, et al. (2007) Opioid receptor gene (OPRM1, OPRK1, and OPRD1) variants and response to naltrexone treatment for alcohol dependence: results from the VA Cooperative Study. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 31:555–63.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-0277.2007.00339.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17374034/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Alcohol%20Clin%20Exp%20Res&title=Opioid%20receptor%20gene%20(OPRM1,%20OPRK1,%20and%20OPRD1)%20variants%20and%20response%20to%20naltrexone%20treatment%20for%20alcohol%20dependence:%20results%20from%20the%20VA%20Cooperative%20Study&volume=31&publication_year=2007&pages=555-63&pmid=17374034&doi=10.1111/j.1530-0277.2007.00339.x&)

11. Gianoulakis C. (2009) Endogenous opioids and addiction to alcohol and other drugs of abuse. Curr Top Med Chem 9:999–1015.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2174/156802609789630956) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19747123/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Top%20Med%20Chem&title=Endogenous%20opioids%20and%20addiction%20to%20alcohol%20and%20other%20drugs%20of%20abuse&volume=9&publication_year=2009&pages=999-1015&pmid=19747123&doi=10.2174/156802609789630956&)

12. Hart AB, Kranzler HR. (2015) Alcohol dependence genetics: lessons learned from genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and post-GWAS analyses. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 39:1312–27.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/acer.12792) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4515198/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26110981/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Alcohol%20Clin%20Exp%20Res&title=Alcohol%20dependence%20genetics:%20lessons%20learned%20from%20genome-wide%20association%20studies%20(GWAS)%20and%20post-GWAS%20analyses&volume=39&publication_year=2015&pages=1312-27&pmid=26110981&doi=10.1111/acer.12792&)

13. Hendershot CS, Claus ED, Ramchandani VA. (2014) Associations of OPRM1 A118G and alcohol sensitivity with intravenous alcohol self-administration in young adults. Addict Biol 21:125–35.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/adb.12165) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4300289/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25039301/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Addict%20Biol&title=Associations%20of%20OPRM1%20A118G%20and%20alcohol%20sensitivity%20with%20intravenous%20alcohol%20self-administration%20in%20young%20adults&volume=21&publication_year=2014&pages=125-35&pmid=25039301&doi=10.1111/adb.12165&)

14. Hughes JR, Keely JP, Niaura RS, et al. (2003) Measures of abstinence in clinical trials: issues and recommendations. Nicotine Tob Res 5:13–25.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12745503/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nicotine%20Tob%20Res&title=Measures%20of%20abstinence%20in%20clinical%20trials:%20issues%20and%20recommendations&volume=5&publication_year=2003&pages=13-25&pmid=12745503&)

15. Jonas DE, Amick HR, Feltner C, et al. (2014) Genetic polymorphisms and response to medications for alcohol use disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Pharmacogenomics 15:1687–1700.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2217/pgs.14.121) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25410894/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics&title=Genetic%20polymorphisms%20and%20response%20to%20medications%20for%20alcohol%20use%20disorders:%20a%20systematic%20review%20and%20meta-analysis&volume=15&publication_year=2014&pages=1687-1700&pmid=25410894&doi=10.2217/pgs.14.121&)

16. Khadka S, Narayanan B, Meda SA, et al. (2014) Genetic association of impulsivity in young adults: a multivariate study. Transl Psychiatry 4:e451.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/tp.2014.95) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4199418/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25268255/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Transl%20Psychiatry&title=Genetic%20association%20of%20impulsivity%20in%20young%20adults:%20a%20multivariate%20study&volume=4&publication_year=2014&pages=e451&pmid=25268255&doi=10.1038/tp.2014.95&)

17. King AC, Cao D, O’Malley SS, et al. (2012. a) Effects of naltrexone on smoking cessation outcomes and weight gain in nicotine-dependent men and women. J Clin Psychopharmacol 32:630–6.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/JCP.0b013e3182676956) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4640209/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22926596/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Psychopharmacol&title=Effects%20of%20naltrexone%20on%20smoking%20cessation%20outcomes%20and%20weight%20gain%20in%20nicotine-dependent%20men%20and%20women&volume=32&publication_year=2012&pages=630-6&pmid=22926596&doi=10.1097/JCP.0b013e3182676956&)

18. King A, Cao D, Vanier C, et al. (2009) Naltrexone decreases heavy drinking rates in smoking cessation treatment: an exploratory study. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 33:1044–50.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-0277.2009.00925.x) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4625790/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19302083/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Alcohol%20Clin%20Exp%20Res&title=Naltrexone%20decreases%20heavy%20drinking%20rates%20in%20smoking%20cessation%20treatment:%20an%20exploratory%20study&volume=33&publication_year=2009&pages=1044-50&pmid=19302083&doi=10.1111/j.1530-0277.2009.00925.x&)

19. King AC, Cao D, Zhang L, et al. (2013) Naltrexone reduction of long-term smoking cessation weight gain in women but not men: a randomized controlled trial. Biol Psychiatry 73:924–30.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.09.025) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3629005/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23177384/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biol%20Psychiatry&title=Naltrexone%20reduction%20of%20long-term%20smoking%20cessation%20weight%20gain%20in%20women%20but%20not%20men:%20a%20randomized%20controlled%20trial&volume=73&publication_year=2013&pages=924-30&pmid=23177384&doi=10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.09.025&)

20. King A, de Wit H, Riley R, et al. (2006) Efficacy of naltrexone in smoking cessation: a preliminary study and an examination of sex differences. Nicotine Tob Res 8:671–82.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/14622200600789767) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17008194/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nicotine%20Tob%20Res&title=Efficacy%20of%20naltrexone%20in%20smoking%20cessation:%20a%20preliminary%20study%20and%20an%20examination%20of%20sex%20differences&volume=8&publication_year=2006&pages=671-82&pmid=17008194&doi=10.1080/14622200600789767&)

21. King DP, Paciga S, Pickering E, et al. (2012. b) Smoking cessation pharmacogenetics: analysis of varenicline and bupropion in placebo-controlled clinical trials. Neuropsychopharmacology 37:641–50.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2011.232) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3260990/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22048466/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuropsychopharmacology&title=Smoking%20cessation%20pharmacogenetics:%20analysis%20of%20varenicline%20and%20bupropion%20in%20placebo-controlled%20clinical%20trials&volume=37&publication_year=2012&pages=641-50&pmid=22048466&doi=10.1038/npp.2011.232&)

22. Kranzler HR, Kirk J. (2001) Efficacy of naltrexone and acamprosate for alcoholism treatment: a meta-analysis. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 25:1335–41.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11584154/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Alcohol%20Clin%20Exp%20Res&title=Efficacy%20of%20naltrexone%20and%20acamprosate%20for%20alcoholism%20treatment:%20a%20meta-analysis&volume=25&publication_year=2001&pages=1335-41&pmid=11584154&)

23. Kranzler HR, McKay JR. (2012) Personalized treatment of alcohol dependence. Curr Psychiatry Rep 14:486–93.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11920-012-0296-5) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6431083/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22810115/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Psychiatry%20Rep&title=Personalized%20treatment%20of%20alcohol%20dependence&volume=14&publication_year=2012&pages=486-93&pmid=22810115&doi=10.1007/s11920-012-0296-5&)

24. Lechner WV, Knopik VS, McGeary JE, et al. (2016) Influence of the A118G polymorphism of the OPRM1 gene and Exon 3 VNTR polymorphism of the DRD4 gene on cigarette craving after alcohol administration. Nicotine Tob Res 18:632–6.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/ntr/ntv136) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5896808/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26092968/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nicotine%20Tob%20Res&title=Influence%20of%20the%20A118G%20polymorphism%20of%20the%20OPRM1%20gene%20and%20Exon%203%20VNTR%20polymorphism%20of%20the%20DRD4%20gene%20on%20cigarette%20craving%20after%20alcohol%20administration&volume=18&publication_year=2016&pages=632-6&pmid=26092968&doi=10.1093/ntr/ntv136&)

25. Li Z, Zhang H. (2013) Analyzing interaction of μ-, δ-and κ-opioid receptor gene variants on alcohol or drug dependence using a pattern discovery-based method. J Addict Res Ther, Supplement 7.  [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3921888/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24533225/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Addict%20Res%20Ther&title=Analyzing%20interaction%20of%20%CE%BC-,%20%CE%B4-and%20%CE%BA-opioid%20receptor%20gene%20variants%20on%20alcohol%20or%20drug%20dependence%20using%20a%20pattern%20discovery-based%20method&publication_year=2013&pmid=24533225&)

26. Manolio TA, Collins FS, Cox NJ, et al. (2009) Finding the missing heritability of complex diseases. Nature 461:747–53.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08494) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2831613/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19812666/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=Finding%20the%20missing%20heritability%20of%20complex%20diseases&volume=461&publication_year=2009&pages=747-53&pmid=19812666&doi=10.1038/nature08494&)

27. Munafo MR, Elliot KM, Murphy MFG, et al. (2007) Association of the mu-opioid receptor gene with smoking cessation. Pharmacogenomics J 7:353–61.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.tpj.6500432) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17224915/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics%20J&title=Association%20of%20the%20mu-opioid%20receptor%20gene%20with%20smoking%20cessation&volume=7&publication_year=2007&pages=353-61&pmid=17224915&doi=10.1038/sj.tpj.6500432&)

28. Oslin DW, Leong SH, Lynch KG, et al. (2015) Naltrexone vs placebo for the treatment of alcohol dependence: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry 72:430–7.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2014.3053) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25760804/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=JAMA%20Psychiatry&title=Naltrexone%20vs%20placebo%20for%20the%20treatment%20of%20alcohol%20dependence:%20A%20randomized%20clinical%20trial&volume=72&publication_year=2015&pages=430-7&pmid=25760804&doi=10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2014.3053&)

29. O’Malley SS, Krishnan-Sarin S, McKee SA, et al. (2009) Dose-dependent reduction of hazardous alcohol use in a placebo-controlled trial of naltrexone for smoking cessation. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 12:589–97.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1017/S146114570800936X) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3094855/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18796184/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int%20J%20Neuropsychopharmacol&title=Dose-dependent%20reduction%20of%20hazardous%20alcohol%20use%20in%20a%20placebo-controlled%20trial%20of%20naltrexone%20for%20smoking%20cessation&volume=12&publication_year=2009&pages=589-97&pmid=18796184&doi=10.1017/S146114570800936X&)

30. O’Malley SS, Robin RW, Levenson AL, et al. (2008) Naltrexone alone and with sertraline for the treatment of alcohol dependence in Alaska natives and non-natives residing in rural settings: a randomized controlled trial. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 32:1271–83.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-0277.2008.00682.x) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2746027/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18482155/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Alcohol%20Clin%20Exp%20Res&title=Naltrexone%20alone%20and%20with%20sertraline%20for%20the%20treatment%20of%20alcohol%20dependence%20in%20Alaska%20natives%20and%20non-natives%20residing%20in%20rural%20settings:%20a%20randomized%20controlled%20trial&volume=32&publication_year=2008&pages=1271-83&pmid=18482155&doi=10.1111/j.1530-0277.2008.00682.x&)

31. Ray LA, Chin PF, Miotto K. (2010) Naltrexone for the treatment of alcoholism: clinical findings, mechanisms of action, and pharmacogenetics. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets 9:13–22.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2174/187152710790966704) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20201811/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=CNS%20Neurol%20Disord%20Drug%20Targets&title=Naltrexone%20for%20the%20treatment%20of%20alcoholism:%20clinical%20findings,%20mechanisms%20of%20action,%20and%20pharmacogenetics&volume=9&publication_year=2010&pages=13-22&pmid=20201811&doi=10.2174/187152710790966704&)

32. Ray LA, Courtney KE, Ghahremani DG, et al. (2014) Varenicline, low dose naltrexone, and their combination for heavy-drinking smokers: human laboratory findings. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 231:3843–53.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-014-3519-0) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4161630/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24733235/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Psychopharmacology%20(Berl)&title=Varenicline,%20low%20dose%20naltrexone,%20and%20their%20combination%20for%20heavy-drinking%20smokers:%20human%20laboratory%20findings&volume=231&publication_year=2014&pages=3843-53&pmid=24733235&doi=10.1007/s00213-014-3519-0&)

33. Ray LA, Green R, Roche DJO, et al. (2018) Pharmacogenetic effects of naltrexone in individuals of east Asian descent: human laboratory findings from a randomized trial. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 42:613–23.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/acer.13586) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6086578/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29265379/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Alcohol%20Clin%20Exp%20Res&title=Pharmacogenetic%20effects%20of%20naltrexone%20in%20individuals%20of%20east%20Asian%20descent:%20human%20laboratory%20findings%20from%20a%20randomized%20trial&volume=42&publication_year=2018&pages=613-23&pmid=29265379&doi=10.1111/acer.13586&)

34. Ray LA, Hutchison KE. (2007) Effects of naltrexone on alcohol sensitivity and genetic moderators of medication response: a double-blind placebo-controlled study. Arch Gen Psychiatry 64:1069–77.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.64.9.1069) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17768272/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Arch%20Gen%20Psychiatry&title=Effects%20of%20naltrexone%20on%20alcohol%20sensitivity%20and%20genetic%20moderators%20of%20medication%20response:%20a%20double-blind%20placebo-controlled%20study&volume=64&publication_year=2007&pages=1069-77&pmid=17768272&doi=10.1001/archpsyc.64.9.1069&)

35. Ray R, Jepson C, Patterson F, et al. (2006) Association of OPRM1 A118G variant with the relative reinforcing value of nicotine. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 188:355–63.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-006-0504-2) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16960700/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Psychopharmacology%20(Berl)&title=Association%20of%20OPRM1%20A118G%20variant%20with%20the%20relative%20reinforcing%20value%20of%20nicotine&volume=188&publication_year=2006&pages=355-63&pmid=16960700&doi=10.1007/s00213-006-0504-2&)

36. Ray R, Jepson C, Wileyto EP, et al. (2007) Genetic variation in mu-opioid-receptor-interacting proteins and smoking cessation in a nicotine replacement therapy trial. Nicotine Tob Res 9:1237–41.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/14622200701648367) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17978999/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nicotine%20Tob%20Res&title=Genetic%20variation%20in%20mu-opioid-receptor-interacting%20proteins%20and%20smoking%20cessation%20in%20a%20nicotine%20replacement%20therapy%20trial&volume=9&publication_year=2007&pages=1237-41&pmid=17978999&doi=10.1080/14622200701648367&)

37. Ray LA, Oslin DW. (2009) Naltrexone for the treatment of alcohol dependence among African Americans: results from the COMBINE Study. Drug Alcohol Depend 105:256–8.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2009.07.006) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3409877/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19717248/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Drug%20Alcohol%20Depend&title=Naltrexone%20for%20the%20treatment%20of%20alcohol%20dependence%20among%20African%20Americans:%20results%20from%20the%20COMBINE%20Study&volume=105&publication_year=2009&pages=256-8&pmid=19717248&doi=10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2009.07.006&)

38. Roche DJO, Bujarski S, Hartwell E, et al. (2015) Combined varenicline and naltrexone treatment reduces smoking topography intensity in heavy-drinking smokers. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 134:92–8.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbb.2015.04.013) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4457679/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25933795/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacol%20Biochem%20Behav&title=Combined%20varenicline%20and%20naltrexone%20treatment%20reduces%20smoking%20topography%20intensity%20in%20heavy-drinking%20smokers&volume=134&publication_year=2015&pages=92-8&pmid=25933795&doi=10.1016/j.pbb.2015.04.013&)

39. Roche DJ, Ray LA. (2015) Subjective response as a consideration in the pharmacogenetics of alcoholism treatment. Pharmacogenomics 16:721–36.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2217/pgs.14.143) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25950242/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics&title=Subjective%20response%20as%20a%20consideration%20in%20the%20pharmacogenetics%20of%20alcoholism%20treatment&volume=16&publication_year=2015&pages=721-36&pmid=25950242&doi=10.2217/pgs.14.143&)

40. Roche DJO, Ray LA, Yardley MM, et al. (2016) Current insights into the mechanisms and development of treatments for heavy-drinking cigarette smokers. Curr Addict Rep 3:125–37.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40429-016-0081-3) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4859339/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27162709/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Addict%20Rep&title=Current%20insights%20into%20the%20mechanisms%20and%20development%20of%20treatments%20for%20heavy-drinking%20cigarette%20smokers&volume=3&publication_year=2016&pages=125-37&pmid=27162709&doi=10.1007/s40429-016-0081-3&)

41. Sarginson JE, Killen JD, Lazzeroni LC, et al. (2011) Markers in the 15q24 nicotinic receptor subunit gene cluster (CHRNA5-A3-B4) predict severity of nicotine addiction and response to smoking cessation therapy. Am J Medl Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 156:275–84.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.b.31155) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21268243/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Medl%20Genet%20B%20Neuropsychiatr%20Genet&title=Markers%20in%20the%2015q24%20nicotinic%20receptor%20subunit%20gene%20cluster%20(CHRNA5-A3-B4)%20predict%20severity%20of%20nicotine%20addiction%20and%20response%20to%20smoking%20cessation%20therapy&volume=156&publication_year=2011&pages=275-84&pmid=21268243&doi=10.1002/ajmg.b.31155&)

42. Schacht JP, Randall PK, Latham PK, et al. (2017) Predictors of naltrexone response in a randomized trial: reward-related brain activation, OPRM1 genotype, and smoking status. Neuropsychopharmacology 42:2640–53.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2017.74) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5686497/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28409564/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuropsychopharmacology&title=Predictors%20of%20naltrexone%20response%20in%20a%20randomized%20trial:%20reward-related%20brain%20activation,%20OPRM1%20genotype,%20and%20smoking%20status&volume=42&publication_year=2017&pages=2640-53&pmid=28409564&doi=10.1038/npp.2017.74&)

43. Sun J, Kranzler HR, Bi J. (2015) Refining multivariate disease phenotypes for high chip heritability. BMC Med Genomics 8:S3.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1755-8794-8-S3-S3) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4582350/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26399736/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Med%20Genomics&title=Refining%20multivariate%20disease%20phenotypes%20for%20high%20chip%20heritability&volume=8&publication_year=2015&pages=S3&pmid=26399736&doi=10.1186/1755-8794-8-S3-S3&)

44. Toll L, Berzetei-Gurske IP, Polgar WE, et al. (1998) Standard binding and functional assays related to medications development division testing for potential cocaine and opiate narcotic treatment medications. NIDA Res Monogr 178:440–66.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9686407/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=NIDA%20Res%20Monogr&title=Standard%20binding%20and%20functional%20assays%20related%20to%20medications%20development%20division%20testing%20for%20potential%20cocaine%20and%20opiate%20narcotic%20treatment%20medications&volume=178&publication_year=1998&pages=440-66&pmid=9686407&)

45. Weerts EM, Kim YK, Wand GS, et al. (2008) Differences in δ-and μ-opioid receptor blockade measured by positron emission tomography in naltrexone-treated recently abstinent alcohol-dependent subjects. Neuropsychopharmacology 33:653–65.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.npp.1301440) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17487229/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuropsychopharmacology&title=Differences%20in%20%CE%B4-and%20%CE%BC-opioid%20receptor%20blockade%20measured%20by%20positron%20emission%20tomography%20in%20naltrexone-treated%20recently%20abstinent%20alcohol-dependent%20subjects&volume=33&publication_year=2008&pages=653-65&pmid=17487229&doi=10.1038/sj.npp.1301440&)

46. Xuei X, Dick D, Flury-Wetherill L, et al. (2006) Association of the κ-opioid system with alcohol dependence. Mol Psychiatry 11:1016–24.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.mp.4001882) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16924269/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Psychiatry&title=Association%20of%20the%20%CE%BA-opioid%20system%20with%20alcohol%20dependence&volume=11&publication_year=2006&pages=1016-24&pmid=16924269&doi=10.1038/sj.mp.4001882&)

47. Yarosh HL, Meda SA, De Wit H, et al. (2015) Multivariate analysis of subjective responses to d-amphetamine in healthy volunteers finds novel genetic pathway associations. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 232:2781–94.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-015-3914-1) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4504822/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25843748/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Psychopharmacology%20(Berl)&title=Multivariate%20analysis%20of%20subjective%20responses%20to%20d-amphetamine%20in%20healthy%20volunteers%20finds%20novel%20genetic%20pathway%20associations&volume=232&publication_year=2015&pages=2781-94&pmid=25843748&doi=10.1007/s00213-015-3914-1&)

48. Zhang L, Kendler KS, Chen X. (2006. a) The mu-opioid receptor gene and smoking initiation and nicotine dependence. Behav Brain Funct 2:28.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1744-9081-2-28) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1557520/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16887046/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Behav%20Brain%20Funct&title=The%20mu-opioid%20receptor%20gene%20and%20smoking%20initiation%20and%20nicotine%20dependence&volume=2&publication_year=2006&pages=28&pmid=16887046&doi=10.1186/1744-9081-2-28&)

49. Zhang H, Kranzler HR, Yang BZ, et al. (2008) The OPRD1 and OPRK1 loci in alcohol or drug dependence: OPRD1 variation modulates substance dependence risk. Mol Psychiatry 13:531–43.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.mp.4002035) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3163084/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17622222/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Psychiatry&title=The%20OPRD1%20and%20OPRK1%20loci%20in%20alcohol%20or%20drug%20dependence:%20OPRD1%20variation%20modulates%20substance%20dependence%20risk&volume=13&publication_year=2008&pages=531-43&pmid=17622222&doi=10.1038/sj.mp.4002035&)

50. Zhang H, Luo X, Kranzler HR, et al. (2006. b) Association between two μ-opioid receptor gene (OPRM1) haplotype blocks and drug or alcohol dependence. Hum Mol Genet 15:807–19.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddl024) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3164878/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16476706/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hum%20Mol%20Genet&title=Association%20between%20two%20%CE%BC-opioid%20receptor%20gene%20(OPRM1)%20haplotype%20blocks%20and%20drug%20or%20alcohol%20dependence&volume=15&publication_year=2006&pages=807-19&pmid=16476706&doi=10.1093/hmg/ddl024&)
