# Pharmacogenetic Study in Gastric Cancer Patients Treated with Adjuvant Fluorouracil/Leucovorin or Epirubicin/Cisplatin/Fluorouracil Before and After Chemoradiation on CALGB 80101 (Alliance)

## Metadata
**Authors:** Jai N Patel, Chen Jiang, Kouros Owzar, Flora Mulkey, Jasmine A Luzum, Harvey J Mamon, Daniel G Haller, Tomislav Dragovich, Steven R Alberts, Georg Bjarnason, Christopher G Willet, Donna Niedzwiecki, Peter Enzinger, Mark J Ratain, Charles Fuchs, Howard L McLeod
**Journal:** Pharmacogenetics and genomics
**Date:** 2021 Dec 1
**DOI:** [10.1097/FPC.0000000000000442](https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0000000000000442)
**PMID:** 34149004
**PMCID:** PMC8490297
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8490297/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8490297/pdf/nihms-1709442.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8490297/pdf/nihms-1709442.pdf)

## Abstract

There is a lack of pharmacogenetic predictors of outcome in gastric cancer patients. The aim of this study was to assess previously identified candidate genes associated with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), cisplatin, and/or epirubicin toxicity or response in a cohort of resected gastric cancer patients treated on CALGB (Alliance) 80101. Gastric or gastroesophageal cancer patients randomized to adjuvant 5-FU/leucovorin or epirubicin/cisplatin/5-FU before and after 5-FU chemoradiation were genotyped for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in GSTP1 (rs1695), ERCC1 (rs11615 and rs3212986), XRCC1 (rs25487), UGT2B7 (rs7439366), and the 28-base pair tandem repeats in TYMS (rs34743033). Logistic regression and log rank tests were used to assess the association between each SNP and incidence of grade 3/4 neutropenia and leukopenia, overall (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS), respectively. Toxicity endpoint analysis were adjusted for treatment arm, while OS and PFS were also adjusted for performance status, sex, age, lymph node involvement, and primary tumor site and size. Of 281 subjects with successful genotyping results and available clinical (toxicity and efficacy) data, 166 self-reported non-Hispanic white patients were included in the final analysis. There was lack of evidence of association among any SNPs tested with grade 3/4 neutropenia and leukopenia or OS and PFS. Age, lymph node involvement, and primary tumor size were significantly associated with OS and PFS. This study failed to confirm results of previous gastric cancer pharmacogenetic studies.

Keywords: pharmacogenetic, gastric, cancer, polymorphism, gene, toxicity

## INTRODUCTION

Gastric cancer remains the second most frequent cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide [[1](#R1)]. Despite the incorporation of novel therapies, survival has not drastically improved [[2](#R2), [3](#R3)]. Dose interruptions due to intolerable toxicity may limit drug efficacy. Newer therapeutic approaches to improve upon the medication and dose selection process are warranted.

Pharmacogenetics may allow for risk stratification to predict the likelihood of adverse clinical outcomes [[2](#R2)]. Most pharmacogenetic studies from phase II and III gastric cancer trials have reported inconsistent findings [[2](#R2), [4](#R4)–[8](#R8)], albeit the study design of each has varied substantially. Lack of replication limits the generalizability of findings and clinical adoption. Candidate genes associated with drug-related toxicities (hematological toxicity, neurotoxicity, and nephrotoxicity) and progression-free (PFS) or overall survival (OS) in gastric cancer patients receiving fluoropyrimidines and/or cisplatin are summarized in [Supplemental Table S1](#SD2) [[2](#R2), [4](#R4)–[9](#R9)]. Epirubicin pharmacogenetics has only been studied in breast cancer to date [[10](#R10)].

We conducted a pharmacogenetic study from a randomized trial of resected gastric cancer patients, Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) 80101[[11](#R11)]; CALGB is now part of the Alliance for Clinical Trials in Oncology. The aim was to assess the association between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) previously suggested to be associated with adverse events or survival from phase II and III gastric cancer trials evaluating fluoropyrimidines and/or platinum agents [[2](#R2), [4](#R4)–[9](#R9)] ([Table S1](#SD2)) and those endpoints in CALGB 80101. The following genes were selected for testing based on this data and treatments in CALGB 80101: glutathione S-transferase pi 1 (*GSTP1*), excision repair cross-complementation group 1 (*ERCC1*), x-ray repair complementing defective repair in Chinese hamster cells 1 (*XRCC1*), uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase 2 family polypeptide B7 (*UGT2B7*), and thymidylate synthase (*TYMS*). Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (*DPYD*) was not included since it is already clinically validated.

## PATIENTS AND METHODS

CALGB 80101 randomized resected gastric cancer patients to postoperative ECF - epirubicin, cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) - before and after 5-FU chemoradiation or bolus 5-FU/leucovorin (LV) before and after 5-FU chemoradiation [[11](#R11)]. Those who provided IRB-approved informed consent for the pharmacogenetic sub-study (CALGB 60201) were eligible for analysis. Details on eligibility, treatment and dosing can be found in the original publication [[11](#R11)]. Baseline whole blood samples were collected in 5 mL EDTA tubes. Genotyping details are described in Supplemental Methods.

Toxicity data were collected prospectively by the Alliance Statistics and Data Center at each treatment cycle on forms that mandated reporting of all-grade solicited toxicities, including neutropenia and leukopenia, and grade 3 or higher unsolicited toxicities, as defined by National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria for Adverse Events (NCI-CTCAE) Version 2.0.

### Statistical Analysis

Statistical analyses were conducted by the Alliance Statistics and Data Center using a study database locked on April 24, 2015. Logistic regression assessed the association between each SNP and first episode of on-treatment grade 3/4 neutropenia and leukopenia, adjusted for treatment arm. Log rank tests investigated the association between each SNP and OS and PFS, which were adjusted for treatment arm, performance status, sex, age, lymph node involvement, and primary tumor site and size using Cox proportional hazards regression model. OS was measured from study enrollment until death from any cause. PFS was measured from the date of study enrollment until death or cancer recurrence. An additive genetic model was used for all analyses, like prior studies in [Table S1](#SD2). A SNP was considered validated if its unadjusted P-value was less than 0.05/K or 0.008, where K denotes the number of SNPs tested, and the direction of the effect was concordant with that reported in the literature. A formal *a priori* power analysis was not performed. A SNP by treatment arm interaction test was performed for toxicity and survival endpoints. All analyses were carried out using the R Statistical Environment version 3.2.3 [[12](#R12)], along with extension packages survival 2.38–3[[13](#R13)], genetics 1.3.8.1 [[14](#R14)], and knitr 1.12.3 [[15](#R15)]. Analyses for *TYMS* were conducted with and without taking the *G>C* SNP into account, based on a previous publication [[4](#R4)]: *2R/2R* vs. *2R/3R* vs. *3R/3R* and *3R/4R*; and, *2R/2R*, *2R/3C*, *3C/3C* vs. *2R/3G*, *3C/3G, 3G/3G* and *3G/4R*.

## RESULTS

### Study population

Of 546 patients enrolled onto CALGB 80101 [[11](#R11)], 337 provided consent for the pharmacogenetic study. Of these, 26 did not provide a viable sample and 30 had insufficient DNA, failed quality control or lacked clinical data, resulting in 281 with genotyping results and clinical data. The final analysis was limited to 166 self-reported non-Hispanic white patients ([Supplemental Figure S1](#SD1) – CONSORT Diagram). Of these, 70 received ECF and 96 received 5-FU/LV. Patient characteristics and frequency of grade 3/4 neutropenia and leukopenia are summarized and compared across pharmacogenetic and non-pharmacogenetic cohorts in [Table 1](#T1). Cohorts were well balanced, except more patients were treated with 5-FU/LV in the pharmacogenetic cohort. The observed relative genotype frequencies are shown in [Table 2](#T2). No SNPs showed deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.

### Table 1.

| Characteristics |  | White/Non-Hispanic Pharmacogenetic cohort (N=166)a,b |  | Non-pharmacogenetic cohort (N=380)a |  | Parent 80101 total cohort (N=546)b |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| N | % | N | % | N | % |  |  |
| Treatment Arm | 5FU/LV | 96 | 57.8 | 184 | 48.4 | 280 | 51.3 |
| ECF | 70 | 42.2 | 196 | 51.6 | 266 | 48.7 |  |
| Age (years) | Median (range) | 60.3 (28–79) |  | 58.0 (23–83) |  | 58.7 (23–83) |  |
| ECOG Performance Status | 0 | 80 | 48.2 | 196 | 51.6 | 276 | 50.6 |
| 1 | 84 | 50.6 | 173 | 45.5 | 257 | 47.1 |  |
| 2 | 2 | 1.20 | 11 | 2.9 | 13 | 2.38 |  |
| Sex | Female | 56 | 33.7 | 119 | 31.3 | 175 | 32.1 |
| Male | 110 | 66.3 | 261 | 68.7 | 371 | 68.0 |  |
| Lymph node involvement | 0 nodes | 23 | 13.9 | 62 | 16.3 | 85 | 15.6 |
| 1–3 nodes | 57 | 34.3 | 139 | 36.6 | 196 | 35.9 |  |
| >=4 nodes | 86 | 51.8 | 179 | 47.1 | 265 | 48.5 |  |
| Primary tumor site | Gastric | 108 | 65.1 | 264 | 69.5 | 372 | 68.1 |
| Gastroesophageal | 44 | 26.5 | 76 | 20.0 | 120 | 22.0 |  |
| Both | 13 | 7.83 | 32 | 8.4 | 45 | 8.24 |  |
| Missing | 1 | 0.60 | 8 | 2.1 | 9 | 1.65 |  |
| Primary tumor size | T1–2 | 74 | 44.6 | 181 | 47.6 | 255 | 46.7 |
| T3 | 85 | 51.2 | 181 | 47.6 | 266 | 48.7 |  |
| T4 | 7 | 4.22 | 18 | 4.7 | 25 | 4.58 |  |
| Toxicity | Grade 3 / 4 neutropenia | 86 | 51.8 | 180 | 47.4 | 266 | 48.7 |
| Grade 3 / 4 leukopenia | 57 | 34.3 | 136 | 35.8 | 193 | 35.4 |  |

Table 1 Caption: Patient characteristics

### Table 2.

| Gene | Polymorphism | rsID | Genotype | Frequency | Neutropenia | Leukopenia |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Adjusted Odds Ratioa(95% CI)Adjusted P-value |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| GSTP1 | 105 A>G | rs1695 | AA | 41% | 0.81(0.50–1.31)0.39 |  | 1.02(0.62–1.70)0.94 |
| AG | 48% |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| GG | 11% |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| ERCC1 | 8092 C>A | rs3212986 | AA | 8% | 0.79(0.48–1.30)0.36 |  | 0.73(0.44–1.21)0.22 |
| AC | 33% |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| CC | 58% |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| ERCC1 | 118 C>T | rs11615 | CC | 16% | 1.50(0.96–2.38)0.08 |  | 1.56(0.99–2.51)0.06 |
| CT | 45% |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| TT | 39% |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| XRCC1 | 399 A>G | rs25487 | AA | 15% | 1.11(0.72–1.70)0.65 |  | 1.22(0.77–1.94)0.41 |
| AG | 40% |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| GG | 45% |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| UGT2B7 | 268 His>Tyr | rs7439366 | His/His | 27% | 1.01(0.64–1.57)0.98 |  | 1.14(0.71–1.84)0.58 |
| His/Tyr | 51% |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Tyr/Tyr | 22% |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| TYMS | 28bp repeats and G>C in the second repeat of the 3R variant | rs34743033 | 2R/2R | 28% | 1.07(0.71–1.64)0.74 |  | 0.96(0.62–1.49)0.84 |
| 2R/3R | 46% |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 3R/3R [3R/4R] | 25% |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 2R/2R, 2R/3C, 3C/3C | 66% | 1.13(0.59–2.19)0.71 |  | 1.32(0.67–2.60)0.43 |  |  |  |
| 2R/3G, 3C/3C, 3G/3G, 3G/4R | 34% |  |  |  |  |  |  |

Table 2 Caption: Association between each polymorphism with grade 3/4 neutropenia and leukopenia

### Toxicity

Reported rates of grade 3/4 neutropenia and leukopenia in the pharmacogenetic cohort were 52% and 34%, respectively. [Table 2](#T2) summarizes the association of each SNP with grade 3/4 neutropenia and leukopenia. There was no evidence of association between all SNPs and incidence of grade 3/4 neutropenia and leukopenia. In particular, *TYMS*, *GSTP1* and *ERCC1* failed to validate as markers of high grade leukopenia, neutropenia or overall hematological toxicity as previously reported[[4](#R4), [5](#R5), [9](#R9)]. [Supplemental Figures S2](#SD1) and [S3](#SD1) illustrate the reported rates of high-grade leukopenia and neutropenia stratified by genotype and treatment arm, respectively. Similarly, [Supplemental Table S2](#SD2) summarizes the reported rates. There was lack of a significant interaction between SNP and treatment arm for both toxicity endpoints.

### Survival

The median follow-up duration was 6.5 years. The median OS in ECF and 5-FU/LV treated patients in the pharmacogenetic cohort was 38.9 and 36.2 months, and the median PFS was 25.3 and 32.0 months, respectively. [Table 3](#T3) summarizes the association of each SNP and clinical covariate with OS and PFS. There was no evidence of association among any SNPs with OS and PFS. In particular, *TYMS* and *GSTP1* failed to validate as markers of OS or PFS as previously reported [[6](#R6), [8](#R8)], and *XRCC1* was not significantly associated with OS as previously reported [[4](#R4), [5](#R5)]. Among the clinical covariates included in the analysis, increasing age, lymph node involvement, and primary tumor size were associated with worse OS and PFS. [Supplemental Table S3](#SD2) summarizes the median OS and PFS stratified by treatment arm and genotype. There was lack of a significant interaction between SNP and treatment arm for both survival endpoints.

### Table 3.

| Covariates |  | Overall survival | Progression-free survival |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| HR (95% CI)P-value | HR (95% CI)P-value |  |  |
| Clinical |  |  |  |
| Treatment arm (ECF vs. 5FU/LV) |  | 0.99 (0.67–1.45)0.96 | 1.13 (0.78–1.63)0.54 |
| ECOG Performance status |  | 1.05 (0.74–1.50)0.77 | 0.94 (0.67–1.34)0.74 |
| Sex (Male vs. Female) |  | 1.22 (0.81–1.84)0.33 | 1.22 (0.82–1.82)0.33 |
| Age (continuous) |  | 1.02 (1.00–1.04) 0.03 | 1.02 (1.00–1.04) 0.04 |
| Lymph node involvement |  | 1.59 (1.19–2.13) 0.002 | 1.65 (1.24–2.18) 0.0006 |
| Primary tumor site | Gastroesophageal vs. Both | 0.56 (0.28–1.13)0.10 | 0.63 (0.32–1.26)0.19 |
| Gastroesophageal vs Gastric | 1.13 (0.74–1.73)0.58 | 1.21 (0.80–1.84)0.37 |  |
| Primary tumor size |  | 1.59 (1.15–2.20) 0.005 | 1.57 (1.15–2.15) 0.005 |
| Pharmacogenetic a |  |  |  |
| GSTP1 105 A>G |  | 0.82 (0.61–1.11)0.20 | 0.83 (0.62–1.12)0.22 |
| ERCC1 118 C>T |  | 1.10 (0.84–1.45)0.48 | 1.06 (0.81–1.39)0.66 |
| ERCC1 8092 C>A |  | 0.80 (0.59–1.08)0.15 | 0.87 (0.65–1.17)0.36 |
| XRCC1 399 A>G |  | 0.81 (0.62–1.07)0.14 | 0.80 (0.61–1.05)0.10 |
| UGT2B7 268 His>Tyr |  | 1.09 (0.83–1.43)0.55 | 1.04 (0.80–1.36)0.79 |
| TYMS (2R/2R vs. 2R/3R vs. 3R/3R [3R/4R]) |  | 1.11 (0.83–1.47)0.48 | 1.08 (0.82–1.42)0.60 |
| TYMS (2R/2R, 2R/3C, 3C/3C vs. 2R/3G, 3C/3G, 3G/3G, 3G/4R) |  | 0.94 (0.62–1.43)0.77 | 0.92 (0.61–1.38)0.68 |

Table 3 Caption: Association of each SNP and clinical covariate with overall and progression-free survival

## DISCUSSION

In this focused pharmacogenetic study conducted from a randomized trial of resected gastric cancer patients, SNPs in *GSTP1*, *ERCC1*, *XRCC1*, and *UGT2B7,* and the 28 base-pair tandem repeats in *TYMS* failed to confirm the results of previous pharmacogenetic studies in gastric cancer patients [[2](#R2), [4](#R4)–[7](#R7)]. The prevalence of high-grade leukopenia and neutropenia varied by genotype and treatment arm ([Figures S2](#SD1) and [S3](#SD1), respectively); however, these differences were not statistically significant. [Supplemental Table S1](#SD2) summarizes the sample size, candidate genes, treatments, and findings from previous pharmacogenetic studies.

Although mechanistically these genes would be expected to play a putative role in drug response (e.g., variations in the gene coding the target enzyme of 5-FU cytotoxicity, *TYMS*), lack of replication across studies limits generalizability and clinical adoption. For example, polymorphisms in *ERCC1*, a DNA repair enzyme, that result in reduced expression are associated with decreased removal of platinum-DNA adducts and increased cytotoxicity [[16](#R16), [17](#R17)]. The *ERCC1 8092C>A* polymorphism potentially leads to destabilization of *ERCC1* mRNA and lower enzyme expression [[18](#R18), [19](#R19)]. Cisplatin-treated patients carrying at least one *ERCC1 8092A* allele had a higher absolute rate of grade 3/4 leukopenia and neutropenia, respectively, while this trend was not noted in patients who did not receive cisplatin ([Figures S2](#SD1) and [S3](#SD1)). A similar relationship can be seen for *ERCC1 118C>T*. The direction of effect is as expected for both *ERCC1* SNPs but there was no significant interaction between SNP and treatment arm, possibly due to an underpowered analysis.

Previous studies have investigated the role of UGT2B7 in epirubicin inactivation [[20](#R20)]. One breast cancer study identified those with the *Tyr/Tyr* genotype had significantly longer disease-free survival [[10](#R10)]. This study is the first to evaluate epirubicin pharmacogenetics in gastric cancer and did not identify an association between *UGT2B7* polymorphisms and clinical outcomes, possibly due to differences in dosing, concomitant chemotherapy/radiation, and/or heterogeneity in disease type and prognosis.

There are potential reasons for conflicting results between gastric cancer pharmacogenetic studies. While previous studies included patients regardless of race, we included a homogenous subset who were self-defined as non-Hispanic white to account for genetic population substructure. Treatment modalities differed considerably between studies ([Table S1](#SD2)), which could further explain differences in results. The studies by Goekkurt et al. [[4](#R4), [5](#R5)] and Ruzzo et al. [[6](#R6)] were conducted in patients with metastatic disease, whereas this study included patients with resected tumors, which may influence survival endpoints. The most recent pharmacogenetic analysis from a phase III trial, and with similar treatments as this study, randomized patients with resectable gastroesophageal cancer to receive surgery alone or perioperative ECF [[7](#R7)]; however, patients did not receive radiation. No polymorphisms were significantly associated with toxicity; however, *TYMS* appeared to be associated with median OS in patients receiving surgery alone. Differences in analysis (e.g. arm-specific versus entire study population analysis, adjusting for cofounders, etc.) may also affect findings.

There are limitations of this analysis. The sample size was a small proportion of the overall parent cohort (approximately 30%); therefore, results may not be representative of the entire study population. Nonetheless, this study was similar to or larger than the sample size of prior gastric cancer pharmacogenetic studies [[2](#R2)]. The analysis was limited to self-defined non-Hispanic white patients, which in the absence of genome-wide genotyping data, is a good surrogate criterion for identifying a homogenous genetic European population for replication. The imbalance in treatment arms between the pharmacogenetic and non-pharmacogenetic cohorts may confound results; however, there were no significant differences in rates of toxicities or OS/PFS between arms. While competing risks (e.g. death and progression) are not considered in the statistical model, most episodes of neutropenia and leukopenia occur early within treatment before death or disease progression. Given the candidate gene approach, not all pharmacogenetic variants that may influence 5-FU, epirubicin and/or cisplatin were analyzed. Further, pharmacogenetic effects are likely to be dependent on a specific drug (e.g. *ERCC1* and platinum agents). *TYMS* was the only gene expected to impact both arms. Due to limited sample size, each gene was analyzed across the entire study population then adjusted for treatment arm. Interaction tests were also performed, but found to be negative, also possibly due to limited sample size. Due to these concerns, the analysis can be considered hypothesis generating. Although DNA was collected prospectively, by nature this pharmacogenetic study is retrospective and may suffer from flaws associated with retrospective analyses such as selection bias, information bias, and the reliance on accurate record-keeping. On the other hand, it is well recognized that many studies cannot be replicated; this is particularly true in the context of studies evaluating multiple biomarkers [[21](#R21)].

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgments:

The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Richard Swanson for his assistance in the conduct of the parent study, CALGB 80101.

Support:

Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of Health under Award Numbers U10CA180821, U10CA180882, and U24CA196171 (to the Alliance for Clinical Trials in Oncology), the NIH National Institute of General Medical Sciences Grants U01GM61390, U01GM61393 and U01GM63440; U10CA031983, U10CA060138, UG1CA233160, UG1CA233180, UG1CA233253, UG1CA233327, UG1CA233337, UG1CA233373, U10CA180857; U10CA180863 (Canadian Cancer Trials Group); U10CA180868 (NRG Oncology/RTOG); U10CA180820 (ECOG-ACRIN); and U10CA180888 (SWOG). [https://acknowledgments.alliancefound.org](https://acknowledgments.alliancefound.org/). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

## Footnotes

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Supplementary Materials

### Supplementary Materials

## References

1. Bray F, Ferlay J, Soerjomataram I, Siegel RL, Torre LA, and Jemal A. Global cancer statistics 2018: GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries. CA Cancer J Clin 2018; 68(6):394–424.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3322/caac.21492) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30207593/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=CA%20Cancer%20J%20Clin&title=Global%20cancer%20statistics%202018:%20GLOBOCAN%20estimates%20of%20incidence%20and%20mortality%20worldwide%20for%2036%20cancers%20in%20185%20countries.&author=F%20Bray&author=J%20Ferlay&author=I%20Soerjomataram&author=RL%20Siegel&author=LA%20Torre&volume=68&issue=6&publication_year=2018&pages=394-424&pmid=30207593&doi=10.3322/caac.21492&)

2. Patel JN, Fuchs CS, Owzar K, Chen Z, and McLeod HL. Gastric cancer pharmacogenetics: progress or old tripe? Pharmacogenomics 2013; 14(9):1053–1064.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2217/pgs.13.88) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23837480/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics&title=Gastric%20cancer%20pharmacogenetics:%20progress%20or%20old%20tripe?&author=JN%20Patel&author=CS%20Fuchs&author=K%20Owzar&author=Z%20Chen&author=HL%20McLeod&volume=14&issue=9&publication_year=2013&pages=1053-1064&pmid=23837480&doi=10.2217/pgs.13.88&)

3. Network NCC. Gastric Cancer. NCCN Guidelines 2019; Version 3.2019  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=NCCN%20Guidelines&title=Gastric%20Cancer.&author=NCC%20Network&publication_year=2019&)

4. Goekkurt E, Al-Batran SE, Hartmann JT, Mogck U, Schuch G, Kramer M, et al. Pharmacogenetic analyses of a phase III trial in metastatic gastroesophageal adenocarcinoma with fluorouracil and leucovorin plus either oxaliplatin or cisplatin: a study of the arbeitsgemeinschaft internistische onkologie. J Clin Oncol 2009; 27(17):2863–2873.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2008.19.1718) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19332728/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Pharmacogenetic%20analyses%20of%20a%20phase%20III%20trial%20in%20metastatic%20gastroesophageal%20adenocarcinoma%20with%20fluorouracil%20and%20leucovorin%20plus%20either%20oxaliplatin%20or%20cisplatin:%20a%20study%20of%20the%20arbeitsgemeinschaft%20internistische%20onkologie.&author=E%20Goekkurt&author=SE%20Al-Batran&author=JT%20Hartmann&author=U%20Mogck&author=G%20Schuch&volume=27&issue=17&publication_year=2009&pages=2863-2873&pmid=19332728&doi=10.1200/JCO.2008.19.1718&)

5. Goekkurt E, Al-Batran SE, Mogck U, Pauligk C, Hartmann JT, Kramer M, et al. Pharmacogenetic analyses of hematotoxicity in advanced gastric cancer patients receiving biweekly fluorouracil, leucovorin, oxaliplatin and docetaxel (FLOT): a translational study of the Arbeitsgemeinschaft Internistische Onkologie (AIO). Ann Oncol 2009; 20(3):481–485.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/annonc/mdn667) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19074750/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann%20Oncol&title=Pharmacogenetic%20analyses%20of%20hematotoxicity%20in%20advanced%20gastric%20cancer%20patients%20receiving%20biweekly%20fluorouracil,%20leucovorin,%20oxaliplatin%20and%20docetaxel%20(FLOT):%20a%20translational%20study%20of%20the%20Arbeitsgemeinschaft%20Internistische%20Onkologie%20(AIO).&author=E%20Goekkurt&author=SE%20Al-Batran&author=U%20Mogck&author=C%20Pauligk&author=JT%20Hartmann&volume=20&issue=3&publication_year=2009&pages=481-485&pmid=19074750&doi=10.1093/annonc/mdn667&)

6. Ruzzo A, Graziano F, Kawakami K, Watanabe G, Santini D, Catalano V, et al. Pharmacogenetic profiling and clinical outcome of patients with advanced gastric cancer treated with palliative chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 2006; 24(12):1883–1891.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2005.04.8322) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16622263/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Pharmacogenetic%20profiling%20and%20clinical%20outcome%20of%20patients%20with%20advanced%20gastric%20cancer%20treated%20with%20palliative%20chemotherapy.&author=A%20Ruzzo&author=F%20Graziano&author=K%20Kawakami&author=G%20Watanabe&author=D%20Santini&volume=24&issue=12&publication_year=2006&pages=1883-1891&pmid=16622263&doi=10.1200/JCO.2005.04.8322&)

7. Smyth E, Zhang S, Cunningham D, Wotherspoon A, Soong R, Peckitt C, et al. Pharmacogenetic Analysis of the UK MRC (Medical Research Council) MAGIC Trial: Association of Polymorphisms with Toxicity and Survival in Patients Treated with Perioperative Epirubicin, Cisplatin, and 5-fluorouracil (ECF) Chemotherapy. Clin Cancer Res 2017; 23(24):7543–7549.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-16-3142) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6175041/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28972045/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Cancer%20Res&title=Pharmacogenetic%20Analysis%20of%20the%20UK%20MRC%20(Medical%20Research%20Council)%20MAGIC%20Trial:%20Association%20of%20Polymorphisms%20with%20Toxicity%20and%20Survival%20in%20Patients%20Treated%20with%20Perioperative%20Epirubicin,%20Cisplatin,%20and%205-fluorouracil%20(ECF)%20Chemotherapy.&author=E%20Smyth&author=S%20Zhang&author=D%20Cunningham&author=A%20Wotherspoon&author=R%20Soong&volume=23&issue=24&publication_year=2017&pages=7543-7549&pmid=28972045&doi=10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-16-3142&)

8. Meulendijks D, Rozeman EA, Cats A, Sikorska K, Joerger M, Deenen MJ, et al. Pharmacogenetic variants associated with outcome in patients with advanced gastric cancer treated with fluoropyrimidine and platinum-based triplet combinations: a pooled analysis of three prospective studies. Pharmacogenomics J 2017; 17(5):441–451.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/tpj.2016.81) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27995989/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics%20J&title=Pharmacogenetic%20variants%20associated%20with%20outcome%20in%20patients%20with%20advanced%20gastric%20cancer%20treated%20with%20fluoropyrimidine%20and%20platinum-based%20triplet%20combinations:%20a%20pooled%20analysis%20of%20three%20prospective%20studies.&author=D%20Meulendijks&author=EA%20Rozeman&author=A%20Cats&author=K%20Sikorska&author=M%20Joerger&volume=17&issue=5&publication_year=2017&pages=441-451&pmid=27995989&doi=10.1038/tpj.2016.81&)

9. Schulz C, Zhang W, Lenz HJ, Neumann J, Kullmann F, Kunzmann V, et al. Germline polymorphisms (SNPs) to predict toxicity and efficacy in FLOT-treated patients with locally advanced gastroesophageal junction or gastric adenocarcinoma—data from the NeoFLOT study. Translational Cancer Research 2018; 7(6)  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Translational%20Cancer%20Research&title=Germline%20polymorphisms%20(SNPs)%20to%20predict%20toxicity%20and%20efficacy%20in%20FLOT-treated%20patients%20with%20locally%20advanced%20gastroesophageal%20junction%20or%20gastric%20adenocarcinoma%E2%80%94data%20from%20the%20NeoFLOT%20study.&author=C%20Schulz&author=W%20Zhang&author=HJ%20Lenz&author=J%20Neumann&author=F%20Kullmann&volume=7&issue=6&publication_year=2018&)

10. Parmar S, Stingl JC, Huber-Wechselberger A, Kainz A, Renner W, Langsenlehner U, et al. Impact of UGT2B7 His268Tyr polymorphism on the outcome of adjuvant epirubicin treatment in breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res 2011; 13(3):R57.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/bcr2894) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3218946/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21658222/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Breast%20Cancer%20Res&title=Impact%20of%20UGT2B7%20His268Tyr%20polymorphism%20on%20the%20outcome%20of%20adjuvant%20epirubicin%20treatment%20in%20breast%20cancer.&author=S%20Parmar&author=JC%20Stingl&author=A%20Huber-Wechselberger&author=A%20Kainz&author=W%20Renner&volume=13&issue=3&publication_year=2011&pages=R57&pmid=21658222&doi=10.1186/bcr2894&)

11. Fuchs CS, Niedzwiecki D, Mamon HJ, Tepper JE, Ye X, Swanson RS, et al. Adjuvant Chemoradiotherapy With Epirubicin, Cisplatin, and Fluorouracil Compared With Adjuvant Chemoradiotherapy With Fluorouracil and Leucovorin After Curative Resection of Gastric Cancer: Results From CALGB 80101 (Alliance). J Clin Oncol 2017; 35(32):3671–3677.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2017.74.2130) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5678342/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28976791/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Adjuvant%20Chemoradiotherapy%20With%20Epirubicin,%20Cisplatin,%20and%20Fluorouracil%20Compared%20With%20Adjuvant%20Chemoradiotherapy%20With%20Fluorouracil%20and%20Leucovorin%20After%20Curative%20Resection%20of%20Gastric%20Cancer:%20Results%20From%20CALGB%2080101%20(Alliance).&author=CS%20Fuchs&author=D%20Niedzwiecki&author=HJ%20Mamon&author=JE%20Tepper&author=X%20Ye&volume=35&issue=32&publication_year=2017&pages=3671-3677&pmid=28976791&doi=10.1200/JCO.2017.74.2130&)

12. Team RC. A language and environment for statistical computing R Foundation for Statistical Computing; 2015; Vienna, Austria  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=A%20language%20and%20environment%20for%20statistical%20computing&publication_year=2015&)

13. Therneau T. Survival Analysis. Package ‘survival’ 2015; version 2.38  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Package%20%E2%80%98survival%E2%80%99&title=Survival%20Analysis.&author=T%20Therneau&publication_year=2015&)

14. Warnes G. Package ‘genetics’. Population Genetics 2013; 1.3.8.1  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Population%20Genetics&title=Package%20%E2%80%98genetics%E2%80%99.&author=G%20Warnes&publication_year=2013&)

15. Xie Y. knitr. A General-Purpose Package for Dynamic Report Generation in R. R Package 2016; version 1.12.3  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=R%20Package&title=knitr.%20A%20General-Purpose%20Package%20for%20Dynamic%20Report%20Generation%20in%20R.&author=Y%20Xie&publication_year=2016&)

16. Li Q, Yu JJ, Mu C, Yunmbam MK, Slavsky D, Cross CL, et al. Association between the level of ERCC-1 expression and the repair of cisplatin-induced DNA damage in human ovarian cancer cells. Anticancer Res 2000; 20(2A):645–652.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10810335/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Anticancer%20Res&title=Association%20between%20the%20level%20of%20ERCC-1%20expression%20and%20the%20repair%20of%20cisplatin-induced%20DNA%20damage%20in%20human%20ovarian%20cancer%20cells.&author=Q%20Li&author=JJ%20Yu&author=C%20Mu&author=MK%20Yunmbam&author=D%20Slavsky&volume=20&issue=2A&publication_year=2000&pages=645-652&pmid=10810335&)

17. Zhou W, Gurubhagavatula S, Liu G, Park S, Neuberg DS, Wain JC, et al. Excision repair cross-complementation group 1 polymorphism predicts overall survival in advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients treated with platinum-based chemotherapy. Clin Cancer Res 2004; 10(15):4939–4943.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-04-0247) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15297394/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Cancer%20Res&title=Excision%20repair%20cross-complementation%20group%201%20polymorphism%20predicts%20overall%20survival%20in%20advanced%20non-small%20cell%20lung%20cancer%20patients%20treated%20with%20platinum-based%20chemotherapy.&author=W%20Zhou&author=S%20Gurubhagavatula&author=G%20Liu&author=S%20Park&author=DS%20Neuberg&volume=10&issue=15&publication_year=2004&pages=4939-4943&pmid=15297394&doi=10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-04-0247&)

18. Suk R, Gurubhagavatula S, Park S, Zhou W, Su L, Lynch TJ, et al. Polymorphisms in ERCC1 and grade 3 or 4 toxicity in non-small cell lung cancer patients. Clin Cancer Res 2005; 11(4):1534–1538.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-04-1953) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15746057/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Cancer%20Res&title=Polymorphisms%20in%20ERCC1%20and%20grade%203%20or%204%20toxicity%20in%20non-small%20cell%20lung%20cancer%20patients.&author=R%20Suk&author=S%20Gurubhagavatula&author=S%20Park&author=W%20Zhou&author=L%20Su&volume=11&issue=4&publication_year=2005&pages=1534-1538&pmid=15746057&doi=10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-04-1953&)

19. Shen J, Desai M, Agrawal M, Kennedy DO, Senie RT, Santella RM, et al. Polymorphisms in nucleotide excision repair genes and DNA repair capacity phenotype in sisters discordant for breast cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2006; 15(9):1614–1619.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-06-0218) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16985021/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Epidemiol%20Biomarkers%20Prev&title=Polymorphisms%20in%20nucleotide%20excision%20repair%20genes%20and%20DNA%20repair%20capacity%20phenotype%20in%20sisters%20discordant%20for%20breast%20cancer.&author=J%20Shen&author=M%20Desai&author=M%20Agrawal&author=DO%20Kennedy&author=RT%20Senie&volume=15&issue=9&publication_year=2006&pages=1614-1619&pmid=16985021&doi=10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-06-0218&)

20. Innocenti F, Iyer L, Ramirez J, Green MD, and Ratain MJ. Epirubicin glucuronidation is catalyzed by human UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2B7. Drug Metab Dispos 2001; 29(5):686–692.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11302935/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Drug%20Metab%20Dispos&title=Epirubicin%20glucuronidation%20is%20catalyzed%20by%20human%20UDP-glucuronosyltransferase%202B7.&author=F%20Innocenti&author=L%20Iyer&author=J%20Ramirez&author=MD%20Green&author=MJ%20Ratain&volume=29&issue=5&publication_year=2001&pages=686-692&pmid=11302935&)

21. Ioannidis JP. Why most published research findings are false. PLoS Med 2005; 2(8):e124.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0020124) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1182327/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16060722/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Med&title=Why%20most%20published%20research%20findings%20are%20false.&author=JP%20Ioannidis&volume=2&issue=8&publication_year=2005&pages=e124&pmid=16060722&doi=10.1371/journal.pmed.0020124&)

22. Thomas F, Hoskins JM, Dvorak A, Tan BR, and McLeod HL. Detection of the G>C SNP and rare mutations in the 28-bp repeat of TYMS using gel-based capillary electrophoresis. Pharmacogenomics 2010; 11(12):1751–1756.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2217/pgs.10.170) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3128643/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21142919/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics&title=Detection%20of%20the%20G>C%20SNP%20and%20rare%20mutations%20in%20the%2028-bp%20repeat%20of%20TYMS%20using%20gel-based%20capillary%20electrophoresis.&author=F%20Thomas&author=JM%20Hoskins&author=A%20Dvorak&author=BR%20Tan&author=HL%20McLeod&volume=11&issue=12&publication_year=2010&pages=1751-1756&pmid=21142919&doi=10.2217/pgs.10.170&)
