# Exploring the Role of Alcohol Metabolizing Genotypes in a 12-Week Clinical Trial of Naltrexone for Alcohol Use Disorder

## Metadata
**Authors:** João M Castaldelli-Maia, André Malbergier, Adriana B P de Oliveira, Ricardo A Amaral, André B Negrão, Priscila D Gonçalves, Antonio Ventriglio, Domenico de Berardis, Juliana de Antonio, Isabela Firigato, Gilka J F Gattás, Fernanda de Toledo Gonçalves
**Journal:** Biomolecules
**Date:** 2021 Oct 10
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom11101495](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom11101495)
**PMID:** 34680127
**PMCID:** PMC8533258
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8533258/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8533258/pdf/biomolecules-11-01495.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8533258/pdf/biomolecules-11-01495.pdf)

## Abstract

Background: The efficacy of naltrexone in the treatment of alcohol use disorder (AUD) has been associated with a set of variables not directly related with the expression of opioid receptors. All the variables have been found to be highly associated with AUD itself or more severe clinical levels of AUD. Objectives: Given the high association between alcohol metabolizing enzymes (AME) and the outcome of AUD, the present study aims to investigate the role of AME genotype variants in the treatment of AUD with naltrexone. Methods: We carried out a 12-week longitudinal clinical trial based on the treatment of AUD patients with naltrexone (N = 101), stratified by different alcohol metabolization genotypes. Genotyping was performed after the inclusion of the patients in the study, based on the individual presence of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the ADH (alcohol dehydrogenase)1B (ADH1B*2 and ADH1B*3), ADH1C (ADHC*1) and ALDH (aldehyde dehydrogenase) 2 (ALDH2*2) genes. The outcome of alcohol use has been monitored employing the timeline follow-back during the treatment. Results: The ADH1C*1 (Ile350Val, rs698) and ALDH2*2 (Glu504Lys, rs671) polymorphisms were associated with a better response to naltrexone treatment, whereas the ADH1B*3 (Arg370Cys, rs2066702) allelic variant showed a negative outcome. Conclusions: The present study explores a genomic setting for the treatment of AUD with naltrexone. According to our findings, the association between ADH1C*1 and ALDH2*2 variants and better outcomes suggests a successful treatment, whereas the ADH1B*3 mutated allele might lead to an unsuccessful treatment. Further studies should be performed to investigate the relationship between alcohol metabolizing genotypes, the family history of alcohol use disorders and the effect of naltrexone on the outcomes. Genotyping may be a valuable tool for precision-medicine and individualized approach, especially in the context of alcohol use disorders. The small number of subjects was the main limitation of the present study.

Keywords: alcohol, naltrexone, genotyping, ADH1B, ADH1C, ALDH2

## 1. Introduction

Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is a major public health problem [[1](#B1-biomolecules-11-01495),[2](#B2-biomolecules-11-01495)]. It has been included among the top-ten risk factors for days of activity lost [[3](#B3-biomolecules-11-01495)]. AUD is a clinical syndrome defined by a set of diagnostic criteria [[4](#B4-biomolecules-11-01495)] including the former criteria of alcohol dependence and abuse [[5](#B5-biomolecules-11-01495)]. These criteria are proposed on the basis of genetic evidence [[6](#B6-biomolecules-11-01495)]. In fact, an increased number of genetic variants for alcohol metabolization and heavy alcohol consumption have been proposed over the last decade [[7](#B7-biomolecules-11-01495),[8](#B8-biomolecules-11-01495)] with particular attention to the role of genetic factors, that have been associated with the AUD outcome [[6](#B6-biomolecules-11-01495)] and various clinical features [[9](#B9-biomolecules-11-01495)]. Alcohol metabolizing enzyme (AME) genes, alcohol dehydrogenases (*ADH1B* and *ADH1C*) and aldehyde dehydrogenase (*ALDH2*), are genetic factors associated with the AUD outcome [[6](#B6-biomolecules-11-01495),[10](#B10-biomolecules-11-01495),[11](#B11-biomolecules-11-01495),[12](#B12-biomolecules-11-01495)]. Several AME genes are located in the 4q23 region [[13](#B13-biomolecules-11-01495)], which has been associated with numerous alcohol-use behaviors [[14](#B14-biomolecules-11-01495)].

Regarding the AUD treatments, naltrexone is one of the main pharmacological therapies that was approved by the FDA (Food and Drug Administration) in 1994. This drug is an opioid antagonist on µ, δ and κ receptors that blocks the mesolimbic pathways and reduces heavy drinking and relapses [[15](#B15-biomolecules-11-01495)]. Alcohol indirectly stimulates the endogenous pathways, releasing β-endorphins and enkephalins in the synaptic cleft, which play an excitatory role, mediated by dopamine-release in the *nucleus accumbens* and producing the pleasurable sensation associated with [[16](#B16-biomolecules-11-01495)].

The efficacy of the naltrexone treatment has been associated with genetic variants, which are linked to some patterns of alcohol consumption [[17](#B17-biomolecules-11-01495),[18](#B18-biomolecules-11-01495)]. In addition, variables such as pre-treatment drinking, family history of alcohol problems, male sex and high craving, also contribute to the success of the pharmacological AUD treatment [[19](#B19-biomolecules-11-01495)]. Similarly, these variables have been highly associated with the syndrome itself and severe clinical levels of AUD [[20](#B20-biomolecules-11-01495),[21](#B21-biomolecules-11-01495),[22](#B22-biomolecules-11-01495),[23](#B23-biomolecules-11-01495)].

Despite the results of genetic factors and further variables, largely replicated in psychiatric-genetic studies [[6](#B6-biomolecules-11-01495)], the advanced genetic evidence on addiction has not been applied to effective treatments. Thus, the assessment of genetic characteristics may be crucial to the personalizing treatment and increase the effectiveness of the current pharmacological treatments for AUD. The present study aims to investigate the possible association between polymorphisms in AMEs polymorphism genes (*ADH1B*2*, *ADH1B*3*, *ADH1C*1* and *ALDH2*2*) and the outcome of AUD treatment with naltrexone.

## 2. Methods

### 2.1. Participants

A total of 101 participants in the trial were computed on the basis of the sampling performed in previous similar studies [[24](#B24-biomolecules-11-01495),[25](#B25-biomolecules-11-01495),[26](#B26-biomolecules-11-01495)]. Male patients who met the diagnostic criteria for alcohol use disorder according to the ICD (International Classification of Diseases) 10 years of age to older than 35 years of age were enrolled. People with psychotic or bipolar disorders, dementia and liver diseases were excluded from the present study. Psychiatric diagnoses were assessed through a psychiatric clinical examination made by a certified psychiatrist. Liver diseases were assessed through medical examination made by a certified physician, and laboratory tests were conducted. All the candidate patients went through psychiatric and clinical examination.

Enrollment was advertised in local media and participants were self-referred or referred by other outpatient services for the treatment of AUD. Recruitment occurred between February 2008 and September 2010 in the Institute of Psychiatry of Sao Paulo University Medical School, Brazil. First, all participants were interviewed by clinical psychiatrists (as stated), who evaluated the inclusion and exclusion criteria. After the enrollment, patients were assessed on the basis of their patterns of alcohol consumption through a structured questionnaire, measuring frequency and amount of alcohol use in the last month, as well as their sociodemographic data. All participants signed a written informed consent and the trial was approved by the Institutional Ethical Committee (CAPPesq number 0845/07).

### 2.2. Baseline Measures

#### 2.2.1. Genotyping

Blood samples (5 mL) were collected in EDTA (Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid) and DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), were isolated by the salting-out process, according to Miller et al. [[27](#B27-biomolecules-11-01495)] and stored at −80 °C before the genotyping. Next, DNA samples were qualified and quantified using a NanoDrop™ 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). An A260/A280 ratio between 1.8 and 2.2 was used to classify the samples as high genomic DNA quality.

Genotyping of *ADH1B*2* (rs1229984), *ADH1B*3* (rs2066702), *ADH1C*1* (rs698) and *ALDH2*2* (rs671) polymorphisms was determined by TaqMan^®^ SNP Genotyping Assays (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The primers and probes were predesigned assays by Applied Biosystems, and genotyping was performed on the StepOnePlus™ instrumentation platform (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA), according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Description of the polymorphisms and their corresponding genes, including genomic coordinate, other names, amino acid change (for missense alterations), protein subunit encoded and TaqMan^®^ assays, is described in [Table 1](#biomolecules-11-01495-t001).

| Genes | Polymorphisms (rs) | Genomic Coordinate | Other Names | Transition | ProteinSubunit | TaqMan® Assays |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ADH1B | ADH1B*2(rs1229984) | Chr.4: 99318162 | ADH2*2 | G→AArg48His | β2-ADH | C___2688467_20 |
| ADH1B | ADH1B*3(rs2066702) | Chr.4: 99307860 | ADH2*3 | C→TArg370Cys | β3-ADH | C__11941896_20 |
| ADH1C | ADH1C*1(rs698) | Chr.4: 99339632 | ADH3*1 | A→GIle350Val | γ1-ADH | C__26457410_10 |
| ALDH2 | ALDH2*2(rs671) | Chr.12: 111803962 | ALDH2*Lys504 | A→GGlu504Lys | ALDH2*2 | C__11703892_10 |

Table Caption: Description of the polymorphisms and their corresponding genes, including genomic coordinate, other names, amino acid change (for missense alterations), protein subunit encoded and TaqMan® assays code.

#### 2.2.2. Sociodemographic and Clinical Profile

We collected the following sociodemographic data: age (in years), level of education (up to middle school, high school, university), marital status (married or unmarried), religion (practicing or non-practicing), skin color (white or other), employment (formal job, informal job, not working) and housing status (own house or other). In addition, clinical data were collected as follows: daily smoking (current, former, never), age of onset of alcohol use (in years), mutual-help groups for alcohol use disorder (previous participation or not), outpatient treatment for alcohol use disorder (previous treatment or not), previous inpatient treatment for alcohol use disorders (never, emergency department and wards/communities), previous seizures (yes or no), delirium tremens, (yes or no), legal problems related to alcohol use (yes or no), use of illicit drugs in the last 30 days (yes or no), family history of alcohol use disorders (yes or no) and any alcohol-related diseases (yes or no).

### 2.3. Intervention

Patients were enrolled in a 12-week treatment with naltrexone. They were assessed by a clinical psychiatrist every week in the first month and fortnightly until the end of the study. A cut-off of less than three-times of the average normal levels of hepatic enzymes was adopted as a safety criterion for the prescription of oral naltrexone at 50 mg/day. The medication was dispensed after any psychiatric evaluation. All patients also attended the weekly psychotherapeutic groups. Weekly therapeutic groups were offered by psychologists trained in cognitive-behavioral therapy. Each week a topic related to alcohol use was addressed. Patients entered the group after the first medical evaluation and remained for 12 weeks.

### 2.4. Outcome Measures

The main variable for measuring the outcome was the number of daily alcohol doses and days of alcohol-use during the treatment period. The standard alcohol drink was 14 g of alcohol, defined as a 12-oz beer, 5-oz glass of wine or 1^1/2^-oz shot of spirits. Abstinence was defined as no days of alcohol use. Patients’ alcohol use was monitored by their clinical psychiatrist through a diary based on a timeline follow-back, as suggested by previous clinical studies on alcohol use disorders [[28](#B28-biomolecules-11-01495),[29](#B29-biomolecules-11-01495),[30](#B30-biomolecules-11-01495),[31](#B31-biomolecules-11-01495)]. Psychiatric assessments also included a psycho-educational module about alcohol dependence and a personalized discussion about the impact of alcohol use on the lives of patients. Treatment retention was considered a secondary outcome of interest, measured by the count of the attendance days of each patient (maximum 84 days). All the outcomes were considered on an intention-to-treat basis, following previous clinical studies with patients with alcohol use disorders.

### 2.5. Statistical Methods

All analyses were performed using STATA statistical software, version 16 (Stata Corp., College Station, TX, USA). Initially, we calculated the proportion of each sociodemographic and clinical variable per abstinence status (i.e., no day of alcohol use during the treatment). Then, we carried out logistic and Poisson regression models for each category (abstinence) and count (days of alcohol use, days of 1 unit of alcohol use, days of 2 units of alcohol use, days of 3 units of alcohol use, days of 4 units of alcohol use and days of 5 of more units of alcohol use) outcomes, according to the polymorphism genotypes. All the association analyses were performed under a Dominant model due to the low frequency of the homozygous genotype (i.e., mutated (homozigous + heterozigous genotypes) vs. a wild type genotype as follows: *ADH1B*2* vs. no-*ADH1B*2*, *ADH1B*3* vs. no-*ADH1B*3*, *ADH1C*1* vs. no-*ADH1C*1* and *ALDH2*2* vs. no-*ALDH2*2*) as the predictor. The sociodemographic and clinical variables which had significant differences for abstinence in the initial analysis were included as adjustment covariates in the multiple Poisson and logistic regression models. For these models, the Bonferroni correction was used to set significance at *p* < 0.0016 (0.05/32 models).

## 3. Results

Sociodemographic characteristics of the sample are presented in [Table 2](#biomolecules-11-01495-t002). A total of 101 individuals with ICD-10 alcohol use disorders were included in the present study. The mean age was 48.9 (95% CI = 47.2 to 50.5). A total of 51.5% of patients reported the lowest level of education (up to middle school), 56.4% of subjects were married, 76.2% of individuals presented with white skin color, 59.4% of participants practiced religion, 72.3% of patients were employed (27.7% formally and 44.6% informally) and 77.8% of subjects were living in their own houses. After a 12-week naltrexone treatment, 37 individuals were abstinent (36.6%). There were no significant sociodemographic differences between abstinent and non-abstinent groups.

### Table 2.

| Sociodemographic Data | Total Sample(n = 101) | Non-Abstinent(n = 64) | Abstinent(n = 37) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Age (years), mean (SE) | 48.9 (0.80) | 49.4 (1.14) | 47.9 (1.08) |
| Level of education |   |   |   |
| Up to middle school, n (%) | 52 (51.5) | 31 (48.4) | 21 (56.8) |
| High school, n (%) | 36 (35.6) | 24 (37.5) | 12 (32.4) |
| University, n (%) | 13 (12.9) | 9 (14.1) | 4 (10.8) |
| Marital status, ever married, n (%) | 57 (56.4) | 35 (54.7) | 22 (59.4) |
| Religion, practicing, n (%) | 60 (59.4) | 38 (59.3) | 22 (59.4) |
| Ethnic group, white, n (%) | 77 (76.2) | 49 (76.5) | 28 (75.6) |
| Occupation |   |   |   |
| Formal job, n (%) | 28 (27.7) | 16 (25.0) | 12 (32.4) |
| Informal job, n (%) | 45 (44.6) | 29 (45.3) | 16 (43.2) |
| Not working, n (%) | 28 (27.7) | 19 (29.7) | 9 (24.3) |
| Housing status, own house, n (%) | 77 (77.78) | 48 (77.4) | 29 (78.4) |

Table 2 Caption: Sociodemographic data of the sample (after a 12-week naltrexone treatment).

Clinical characteristics of the sample at baseline are presented in [Table 3](#biomolecules-11-01495-t003). The mean age at onset of alcohol use was 16 years old. Out of those who were ever in an alcohol treatment, 55.4% (56) of them reported a previous outpatient treatment, of which 49 (87.5%) reported at least one inpatient treatment, 30 individuals were admitted in wards or communities, 43 of them attended to mutual-help groups and 19 of patients required emergency support at least once. There was a statistically significant (*p* < 0.05) difference in the frequency distribution of the outpatient treatment between the non-abstinent (61.9%) and abstinent (45.9%) groups.

### Table 3.

| Clinical Characteristics | Total Sample(n = 101) | Non-Abstinent(n = 63) | Abstinent(n = 37) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Age at onset of alcohol use (years), mean (SE) | 16.5 (0.44) | 16.5 (0.51) | 16.4 (0.82) |
| Previous treatment |   |   |   |
| Mutual-help groups, n (%) | 43 (42.6) | 31 (49.2) | 12 (32.4) |
| Outpatient treatment, n (%) | 56 (55.4) | 39 (61.9) | 17 (45.9) * |
| Inpatient treatment, n (%) | 49 (48.5) | 35 (54.7) | 14 (37.8) |
| Emergency department, n (%) | 19 (18.8) | 14 (22.2) | 5 (13.5) |
| Wards/communities, n (%) | 30 (29.7) | 21 (32.8) | 9 (24.3) |
| Never, n (%) | 45 (44.6) | 25 (39.1) | 20 (54.1) |
| Seizures, n (%) | 28 (27.7) | 17 (26.6) | 11 (29.7) |
| Delirium tremens, n (%) | 38 (37.6) | 20 (31.3) | 18 (48.7) |
| Legal problems, n (%) | 38 (37.6) | 24 (37.5) | 14 (37.8) |
| Drug use (30-days), n (%) | 5 (5.0) | 4 (6.3) | 1 (2.7) |
| Alcohol-related diseases, n (%) | 33 (32.7) | 23 (35.9) | 10 (27.1) * |
| Family history of alcohol use Disorders, n (%) | 88 (87.1) | 59 (92.2) | 29 (78.4) ** |
| Daily smoking |   |   |   |
| Current, n (%) | 68 (67.3) | 47 (73.4) | 21 (56.8) |
| Former, n (%) | 21 (20.8) | 11 (17.2) | 10 (27.0) |
| Never, n (%) | 12 (11.9) | 6 (9.4) | 6 (16.2) |
| Alcohol metabolization genotypes |   |   |   |
| ADH1B*2, n (%) | 5 (5.0) | 4 (5.1) | 1 (4.6) |
| ADH1B*3, n (%) | 5 (5.0) | 3 (3.9) | 2 (9.1) |
| ADH1C*1, n (%) | 44 (43.6) | 28 (44.4) | 16 (43.2) |
| ALDH2*2, n (%) | 4 (4.0) | 2 (2.6) | 2 (9.1) |

Table 3 Caption: Baseline clinical characteristics and descriptive analysis.

Regarding the alcohol-related issues, 38 patients reported a previous delirium tremens episode and legal problems, 27.7% of individuals reported seizures and 32.7% reported an alcohol-related disease (e.g., hepatitis and neuropathy), with significant differences in the frequency distribution between the non-abstinent (35.9%) and abstinent (27.1%) groups (*p* < 0.05). Around 5% of the sample reported other drug-use in the last 30 days before the study. Furthermore, 67.3% were current smokers. Almost 90% of individuals had a family history of alcohol use disorders that showed a statistically significant (*p* < 0.001) difference between the non-abstinent (92.2%) and abstinent (78.4%) groups. The prevalence of mutated genotypes (homozygous + heterozygous) was 43.6% for the *ADH1C*1* polymorphism, about 5% for both *ADH1B*2* and *ADH1B*3* and 4% for *ALDH2*2*. None of these mutated genotypes were correlated with family history of alcohol use disorders in our sample.

Concerning the outcome measures, the mean number of days for drinking and retention were 8.6 (95% CI = 5.6 to 11.6) and 67.0 (95% CI = 61.6 to 72.3), respectively. Among the drinking doses per day of use, they ranked: heavy drinking (5 or more doses) with a mean of 2.3 days of use (95% CI = 1.2 to 3.5), 2 doses (mean = 2.2, 95% CI = 1.3 to 3.2) and 1 dose (mean = 1.9, 95% CI = 1.0 to 2.9). Subjects preferred 1 (34.5%), 2 (36.3%), 3 (29.7%), 4 (30.8%) or 5 or more drinks (34.1%) in the days of use and 37% did not drink during the entire period.

[Table 4](#biomolecules-11-01495-t004) presents the correlation between outcomes and genotypes *ADH1B*2*, *ADH1B*3*, *ADH1C*1* and *ALDH2*2* through adjusted Poisson and logistic regression models. No significant correlation was found for the *ADH1B*2* genotypes. Patients with mutated *ADH1B*3* reported more days of alcohol use (coef = 0.57, 95% CI = 0.34 to 0.80, *p* < 0.001), 1 drink (coef = 0.74, 95% CI = 0.29 to 1.19, *p* = 0.001), 2 drinks (coef = 0.86, 95% CI = 0.48 to 1.23, *p* < 0.001) and 5 drinks or more (coef = 0.61, 95% CI = 0.11 to 1.01, *p* = 0.015). On the other hand, patients that presented with the mutated *ADH1C*1* reported less days of alcohol use (coef = −0.31, 95% CI = −0.45 to −0.16, *p* < 0.001), 1 drink (coef = −0.91, 95% CI = −1.25 to −0.57, *p* < 0.001) and 2 drinks (coef = −0.69, 95% CI = −1.00 to −0.39, *p* < 0.001). The days of alcohol use were also diminutive among the patients who carried mutated *ALDH2*2* (aOR = −0.91, 95% CI = −1.15 to −0.45, *p* < 0.001).

### Table 4.

| Variables | ADH1B*2 |  |  |  | ADH1B*3 |  |  |  | ADH1C*1 |  |  |  | ALDH2*2 |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Coef. | 95% CI |  | p | Coef. | 95% CI |  | p | Coef. | 95% CI |  | p | Coef. | 95% CI |  | p |  |
|   | Lower | Upper |   |   | Lower | Upper |   |   | Lower | Upper |   |   | Lower | Upper |   |  |
| Days of alcohol use a | −0.14 | −0.46 | 0.16 | 0.353 | 0.57 | 0.34 | 0.80 | <0.001 | −0.31 | −0.45 | −0.16 | <0.001 | −0.91 | −1.15 | −0.45 | <0.001 |
| Days of alcohol use (1 unit) a | 0.36 | −0.22 | 0.96 | 0.223 | 0.74 | 0.29 | 1.19 | 0.001 | −0.91 | −1.25 | −0.57 | <0.001 | −0.79 | −1.80 | 0.21 | 0.121 |
| Days of alcohol use (2 units) a | −0.05 | −0.61 | 0.50 | 0.854 | 0.86 | 0.48 | 1.23 | <0.001 | −0.69 | −1.00 | −0.39 | <0.001 | −0.98 | −1.97 | 0.01 | 0.052 |
| Days of alcohol use (3 units) a | −0.01 | −0.75 | 0.73 | 0.984 | −0.88 | −2.04 | 0.28 | 0.137 | −0.48 | −0.96 | −0.01 | 0.047 | −0.32 | −1.14 | 0.49 | 0.438 |
| Days of alcohol use (4 units) a | −0.53 | −1.55 | 0.53 | 0.303 | 0.24 | −0.51 | 1.00 | 0.53 | 0.47 | 0.07 | 0.87 | 0.020 | −1.26 | −3.05 | 0.51 | 0.164 |
| Days of alcohol use (5+ units) a | −1.06 | −2.06 | −0.06 | 0.038 | 0.61 | 0.12 | 1.11 | 0.015 | 0.14 | −0.12 | 0.41 | 0.287 | −13.51 | −734.19 | 707.16 | 0.971 |
| Abstinence b | 0.32 | 0.03 | 3.21 | 0.335 | 0.95 | 0.14 | 6.47 | 0.962 | 1.23 | 0.51 | 2.97 | 0.638 | 4.05 | 0.47 | 34.39 | 0.200 |

Table 4 Caption: Correlation between clinical outcomes and genotyping (ADH1B*2, ADH1B*3, ADH1C*1 and ALDH2*2) through regression models adjusted for previous outpatient treatment, family history of alcohol problems and alcohol-related diseases.

## 4. Discussion

This study aimed to investigate the role of genotype variants of AMEs genes in the treatment outcome with naltrexone. The *ADH1C*1* and *ALDH2*2* polymorphic genotypes were found to be associated with better response for treatment, whereas *ADH1B*3* variant genotypes were found to be less successful. Our findings support the use of naltrexone in those patients who might be less susceptible to alcohol dependence (i.e., *ADH1C*1* and *ALDH2*2*), wherein these polymorphisms have been also related to the AUD protection [[6](#B6-biomolecules-11-01495),[10](#B10-biomolecules-11-01495),[11](#B11-biomolecules-11-01495),[12](#B12-biomolecules-11-01495),[32](#B32-biomolecules-11-01495)]. Other medications (e.g., acamprosate or disulfiram) could have better results in those with the ADH1B*3 variant genotype, and should be tested in further studies.

Genetic epidemiological studies indicated that the higher protective effects for AUD were found among individuals who presented with the *ADH1B*2* and *ALDH2*2* variant genotypes [[33](#B33-biomolecules-11-01495),[34](#B34-biomolecules-11-01495),[35](#B35-biomolecules-11-01495)]. Other variations in *ADH* and *ALDH* genes may also affect the risk of alcohol dependence and abuse, as *ADH1C*1* and *ADH1B** [[32](#B32-biomolecules-11-01495)]. Thus, our findings indicate a putative protective effect of *ALDH2*2* and *ADH1C*1* for alcohol behaviors and treatment response, while the *ADH1B*3* variant genotypes might contribute to a worse clinical outcome. Based on previous findings of protective effects of all these variants on alcohol use behaviors [[6](#B6-biomolecules-11-01495),[10](#B10-biomolecules-11-01495),[11](#B11-biomolecules-11-01495),[12](#B12-biomolecules-11-01495),[32](#B32-biomolecules-11-01495)], we speculate that these individuals should also have lower post-treatment relapse levels compared to those without these variants.

There is a lack of evidence on the inter-relation among alcohol metabolizing genotypes with the naltrexone outcome treatment. Ray et al. [[36](#B36-biomolecules-11-01495)] explored the role of the alcohol enzyme metabolizing genotypes on the effect of naltrexone in alcohol intoxication and craving. The study was a double-blinded, randomized, placebo-controlled laboratory trial of naltrexone versus placebo, reporting no significant effect of *ALDH2* or *ADH1B* polymorphism genotypes on the outcomes of treatment.

Besides the AMEs polymorphisms genes, the naltrexone success treatment also is related to other clinical and biological characteristics. The systematic review conducted by Garbutt et al. [[19](#B19-biomolecules-11-01495)] showed that naltrexone efficacy has been associated with pre-treatment drinking, family history of alcohol problems, polymorphism of the μ-opioid receptor gene, male sex and high craving. Bujarski et al. [[37](#B37-biomolecules-11-01495)] also reported that a family history of alcohol, associated with a pattern of the alcohol metabolizing genotype, might impact negatively on alcohol behaviors. In the present study, outpatient treatment, alcohol-related diseases and family history of alcohol use disorders were also associated with the better treatment response of naltrexone.

The impact of our findings on further genomic evidence for the treatment of alcohol use disorders is potentially interesting. Genotyping has been considered as a possible tool for precision medicine, with a special focus in the area of mental health [[38](#B38-biomolecules-11-01495),[39](#B39-biomolecules-11-01495),[40](#B40-biomolecules-11-01495),[41](#B41-biomolecules-11-01495)]. Even if many studies supported the genotyping *OPRM1* in the treatment with naltrexone [[42](#B42-biomolecules-11-01495),[43](#B43-biomolecules-11-01495),[44](#B44-biomolecules-11-01495)], our data would suggest genotyping for *ADH1B*, *ADH1C* and *ALDH2* before the treatment. Further studies should be carried out to assess the potential role of each genotype in the treatment outcome.

Limitations may include a small sample size compared to previous studies [[24](#B24-biomolecules-11-01495),[25](#B25-biomolecules-11-01495),[26](#B26-biomolecules-11-01495)]. Moreover, as expected for predominantly Caucasian samples [[45](#B45-biomolecules-11-01495),[46](#B46-biomolecules-11-01495)], we found just a small number of individuals with the variant genotypes *ADH1B*2*, *ADH1B*3* and *ALDH2*2*. Unfortunately, we did not include a control group taking other pharmacological interventions for alcohol use disorder, such as acamprosate, disulfiram, gabapentin, topiramate, or a placebo [[15](#B15-biomolecules-11-01495)]. In addition, we only included male individuals, and the alcohol-use clinical outcome assessment was based on self-report only; this was based on methodology suggested in recent randomized clinical prospective studies [[47](#B47-biomolecules-11-01495),[48](#B48-biomolecules-11-01495),[49](#B49-biomolecules-11-01495),[50](#B50-biomolecules-11-01495)]. Interestingly, this study genotyped 100 individuals with AUD for four genotype variants of interest [[14](#B14-biomolecules-11-01495),[51](#B51-biomolecules-11-01495),[52](#B52-biomolecules-11-01495)], as well as analyzed their association with the clinical assessment measures during a standardized 12-week treatment, based on an FDA approved intervention [[53](#B53-biomolecules-11-01495)] and an intention-to-treat analysis [[54](#B54-biomolecules-11-01495)]. This was the first study reporting on the differential role of *ADH1B* variant genotypes for the treatment of AUD. In fact, there is a lack of genomic studies in developing countries, especially investigating alcohol metabolizing enzyme genotypes in Caucasian samples. The majority of these studies have been conducted among Asian ethnicities or Asian descendants [[55](#B55-biomolecules-11-01495),[56](#B56-biomolecules-11-01495),[57](#B57-biomolecules-11-01495),[58](#B58-biomolecules-11-01495)]. However, we were not able to find any significant genotypic association with abstinence in this trial.

## 5. Conclusions

This study added evidence to the genetic factors associated with the AUD treatment with naltrexone (Graphic Abstract). The *ADH1C*1* and *ALDH2*2* variant genotypes seemed to be facilitators, whereas the *ADH1B*3* variant genotypes were not associated with a positive outcome of treatment. Further studies should investigate the relationship among alcohol metabolizing genotypes, family history of alcohol use disorders and the effects of naltrexone. Genotyping might be a valuable tool for precision medicine, especially in the context of alcohol use disorders.

## Author Contributions

Conceptualization, A.M., A.B.P.d.O., G.J.F.G. and F.d.T.G.; methodology, J.M.C.M., A.M. and F.d.T.G.; formal analysis, J.M.C.M. and R.A.A., writing—original draft preparation, J.M.C.M., A.M., A.B.P.d.O., R.A.A., A.B.N., P.D.G., A.V., D.d.B., J.d.A., I.F., G.J.F.G. and F.d.T.G.; writing—review and editing, J.M.C.M., A.M., A.B.P.d.O., R.A.A., A.B.N., P.D.G., A.V., D.d.B., J.d.A., I.F., G.J.F.G. and F.d.T.G.; supervision, A.M., G.J.F.G. and F.d.T.G.; project administration, A.B.P.d.O.; funding acquisition, G.J.F.G. and F.d.T.G. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

## Funding

This research received no external funding. We would like to acknowledge the support of LIM-40 (Medical School, University of São Paulo) for genotyping.

## Institutional Review Board Statement

The study was conducted according to the guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki, and approved by the Institutional Review Board (CAPPesq number 0845/07).

## Informed Consent Statement

All participants signed a written informed consent and the trial was approved by the Institutional Review Board (CAPPesq).

## Data Availability Statement

The data that support the findings of this study are available from *Programa Interdisciplinar de Estudos de Álcool e Drogas* ([https://www.grea.org.br](https://www.grea.org.br), accessed on 3 October 2021) but restrictions apply to the availability of these data, which were used under license for the current study, and so are not publicly available. Data are however available from the authors upon reasonable request and with permission of *Programa Interdisciplinar de Estudos de Álcool e Drogas* ([https://www.grea.org.br](https://www.grea.org.br), accessed on 3 October 2021).

## Conflicts of Interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Footnotes

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Data Availability Statement

The data that support the findings of this study are available from *Programa Interdisciplinar de Estudos de Álcool e Drogas* ([https://www.grea.org.br](https://www.grea.org.br), accessed on 3 October 2021) but restrictions apply to the availability of these data, which were used under license for the current study, and so are not publicly available. Data are however available from the authors upon reasonable request and with permission of *Programa Interdisciplinar de Estudos de Álcool e Drogas* ([https://www.grea.org.br](https://www.grea.org.br), accessed on 3 October 2021).

### Data Availability Statement

The data that support the findings of this study are available from *Programa Interdisciplinar de Estudos de Álcool e Drogas* ([https://www.grea.org.br](https://www.grea.org.br), accessed on 3 October 2021) but restrictions apply to the availability of these data, which were used under license for the current study, and so are not publicly available. Data are however available from the authors upon reasonable request and with permission of *Programa Interdisciplinar de Estudos de Álcool e Drogas* ([https://www.grea.org.br](https://www.grea.org.br), accessed on 3 October 2021).

## References

1. GBD 2016 Alcohol and Drug Use Collaborators The global burden of disease attributable to alcohol and drug use in 195 countries and territories, 1990–2016: A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. Lancet. Psychiatry. 2018;5:987–1012. doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(18)30337-7.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(18)30337-7) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6251968/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30392731/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Lancet.%20Psychiatry&title=The%20global%20burden%20of%20disease%20attributable%20to%20alcohol%20and%20drug%20use%20in%20195%20countries%20and%20territories,%201990%E2%80%932016:%20A%20systematic%20analysis%20for%20the%20Global%20Burden%20of%20Disease%20Study%202016&volume=5&publication_year=2018&pages=987-1012&pmid=30392731&doi=10.1016/S2215-0366(18)30337-7&)

2. James S.L., Castle C.D., Dingels Z.V., Fox J.T., Hamilton E.B., Liu Z., Roberts N.L., Sylte D.O., Henry N.J., LeGrand K.E., et al. Global injury morbidity and mortality from 1990 to 2017: Results from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017. Inj. Prev. 2020;26:96–114. doi: 10.1136/injuryprev-2019-043494.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/injuryprev-2019-043494) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7571366/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32332142/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Inj.%20Prev.&title=Global%20injury%20morbidity%20and%20mortality%20from%201990%20to%202017:%20Results%20from%20the%20Global%20Burden%20of%20Disease%20Study%202017&author=S.L.%20James&author=C.D.%20Castle&author=Z.V.%20Dingels&author=J.T.%20Fox&author=E.B.%20Hamilton&volume=26&publication_year=2020&pages=96-114&pmid=32332142&doi=10.1136/injuryprev-2019-043494&)

3. GBD 2015 Risk Factors Collaborators Global, regional, and national comparative risk assessment of 79 behavioural, environmental and occupational, and metabolic risks or clusters of risks, 1990-2015: A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015. Lancet. 2016;388:1659–1724. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31679-8.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31679-8) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5388856/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27733284/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Lancet&title=Global,%20regional,%20and%20national%20comparative%20risk%20assessment%20of%2079%20behavioural,%20environmental%20and%20occupational,%20and%20metabolic%20risks%20or%20clusters%20of%20risks,%201990-2015:%20A%20systematic%20analysis%20for%20the%20Global%20Burden%20of%20Disease%20Study%202015&volume=388&publication_year=2016&pages=1659-1724&pmid=27733284&doi=10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31679-8&)

4. Castaldelli-Maia J.M., Wang Y.P., Borges G., Silveira C.M., Siu E.R., Viana M.C., Andrade A.G., Martins S.S., Andrade L.H. Investigating dimensionality and measurement bias of DSM-5 alcohol use disorder in a representative sample of the largest metropolitan area in South America. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2015;152:123–130. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2015.04.024.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2015.04.024) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4840018/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26002376/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Drug%20Alcohol%20Depend.&title=Investigating%20dimensionality%20and%20measurement%20bias%20of%20DSM-5%20alcohol%20use%20disorder%20in%20a%20representative%20sample%20of%20the%20largest%20metropolitan%20area%20in%20South%20America&author=J.M.%20Castaldelli-Maia&author=Y.P.%20Wang&author=G.%20Borges&author=C.M.%20Silveira&author=E.R.%20Siu&volume=152&publication_year=2015&pages=123-130&pmid=26002376&doi=10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2015.04.024&)

5. Castaldelli-Maia J.M., Silveira C.M., Siu E.R., Wang Y.P., Milhorança I.A., Alexandrino-Silva C., Borges G., Viana M.C., Andrade A.G., Andrade L.H., et al. DSM-5 latent classes of alcohol users in a population-based sample: Results from the São Paulo Megacity Mental Health Survey, Brazil. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2014;136:92–99. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2013.12.012.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2013.12.012) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4943751/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24440273/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Drug%20Alcohol%20Depend.&title=DSM-5%20latent%20classes%20of%20alcohol%20users%20in%20a%20population-based%20sample:%20Results%20from%20the%20S%C3%A3o%20Paulo%20Megacity%20Mental%20Health%20Survey,%20Brazil&author=J.M.%20Castaldelli-Maia&author=C.M.%20Silveira&author=E.R.%20Siu&author=Y.P.%20Wang&author=I.A.%20Milhoran%C3%A7a&volume=136&publication_year=2014&pages=92-99&pmid=24440273&doi=10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2013.12.012&)

6. Sanchez-Roige S., Palmer A.A., Clarke T.K. Recent Efforts to Dissect the Genetic Basis of Alcohol Use and Abuse. Biol. Psychiatry. 2020;87:609–618. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2019.09.011.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2019.09.011) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7071963/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31733789/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biol.%20Psychiatry&title=Recent%20Efforts%20to%20Dissect%20the%20Genetic%20Basis%20of%20Alcohol%20Use%20and%20Abuse&author=S.%20Sanchez-Roige&author=A.A.%20Palmer&author=T.K.%20Clarke&volume=87&publication_year=2020&pages=609-618&pmid=31733789&doi=10.1016/j.biopsych.2019.09.011&)

7. Gelernter J., Sun N., Polimanti R., Pietrzak R.H., Levey D.F., Lu Q., Hu Y., Li B., Radhakrishnan K., Aslan M., et al. Genome-wide Association Study of Maximum Habitual Alcohol Intake in >140,000 U.S. European and African American Veterans Yields Novel Risk Loci. Biol. Psychiatry. 2019;86:365–376. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2019.03.984.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2019.03.984) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6919570/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31151762/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biol.%20Psychiatry&title=Genome-wide%20Association%20Study%20of%20Maximum%20Habitual%20Alcohol%20Intake%20in%20>140,000%20U.S.%20European%20and%20African%20American%20Veterans%20Yields%20Novel%20Risk%20Loci&author=J.%20Gelernter&author=N.%20Sun&author=R.%20Polimanti&author=R.H.%20Pietrzak&author=D.F.%20Levey&volume=86&publication_year=2019&pages=365-376&pmid=31151762&doi=10.1016/j.biopsych.2019.03.984&)

8. Thompson A., Cook J., Choquet H., Jorgenson E., Yin J., Kinnunen T., Barclay J., Morris A.P., Pirmohamed M. Functional validity, role, and implications of heavy alcohol consumption genetic loci. Sci. Adv. 2020;6:5034. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aay5034.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aay5034) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6962045/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31998841/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sci.%20Adv.&title=Functional%20validity,%20role,%20and%20implications%20of%20heavy%20alcohol%20consumption%20genetic%20loci&author=A.%20Thompson&author=J.%20Cook&author=H.%20Choquet&author=E.%20Jorgenson&author=J.%20Yin&volume=6&publication_year=2020&pages=5034&pmid=31998841&doi=10.1126/sciadv.aay5034&)

9. Park C.I., Kim H.W., Hwang S.S., Kang J.I., Kim S.J. Influence of dopamine-related genes on craving, impulsivity, and aggressiveness in Korean males with alcohol use disorder. Eur. Arch. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 2019 doi: 10.1007/s00406-019-01072-3. [Epub ahead of print]  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00406-019-01072-3) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31559529/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur.%20Arch.%20Psychiatry%20Clin.%20Neurosci.&title=Influence%20of%20dopamine-related%20genes%20on%20craving,%20impulsivity,%20and%20aggressiveness%20in%20Korean%20males%20with%20alcohol%20use%20disorder&author=C.I.%20Park&author=H.W.%20Kim&author=S.S.%20Hwang&author=J.I.%20Kang&author=S.J.%20Kim&publication_year=2019&pmid=31559529&doi=10.1007/s00406-019-01072-3&)

10. Kim S.G. Gender differences in the genetic risk for alcohol dependence--the results of a pharmacogenetic study in Korean alcoholics. Nihon. Arukoru. Yakubutsu. Igakkai. Zasshi. 2009;44:680–685.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20077761/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nihon.%20Arukoru.%20Yakubutsu.%20Igakkai.%20Zasshi.&title=Gender%20differences%20in%20the%20genetic%20risk%20for%20alcohol%20dependence--the%20results%20of%20a%20pharmacogenetic%20study%20in%20Korean%20alcoholics&author=S.G.%20Kim&volume=44&publication_year=2009&pages=680-685&pmid=20077761&)

11. Ducci F., Goldman D. The genetic basis of addictive disorders. Psychiatr. Clin. N. Am. 2012;35:495–519. doi: 10.1016/j.psc.2012.03.010.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psc.2012.03.010) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3506170/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22640768/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Psychiatr.%20Clin.%20N.%20Am.&title=The%20genetic%20basis%20of%20addictive%20disorders&author=F.%20Ducci&author=D.%20Goldman&volume=35&publication_year=2012&pages=495-519&pmid=22640768&doi=10.1016/j.psc.2012.03.010&)

12. Enoch M.A. Genetic influences on response to alcohol and response to pharmacotherapies for alcoholism. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 2014;123:17–24. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2013.11.001.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbb.2013.11.001) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4016188/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24220019/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacol.%20Biochem.%20Behav.&title=Genetic%20influences%20on%20response%20to%20alcohol%20and%20response%20to%20pharmacotherapies%20for%20alcoholism&author=M.A.%20Enoch&volume=123&publication_year=2014&pages=17-24&pmid=24220019&doi=10.1016/j.pbb.2013.11.001&)

13. Yasumizu Y., Sakaue S., Konuma T., Suzuki K., Matsuda K., Murakami Y., Kubo M., Palamara P.F., Kamatani Y., Okada Y. Genome-Wide Natural Selection Signatures Are Linked to Genetic Risk of Modern Phenotypes in the Japanese Population. Mol. Biol. Evol. 2020;37:1306–1316. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa005.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msaa005) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7182208/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31957793/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Biol.%20Evol.&title=Genome-Wide%20Natural%20Selection%20Signatures%20Are%20Linked%20to%20Genetic%20Risk%20of%20Modern%20Phenotypes%20in%20the%20Japanese%20Population&author=Y.%20Yasumizu&author=S.%20Sakaue&author=T.%20Konuma&author=K.%20Suzuki&author=K.%20Matsuda&volume=37&publication_year=2020&pages=1306-1316&pmid=31957793&doi=10.1093/molbev/msaa005&)

14. Sun Y., Chang S., Wang F., Sun H., Ni Z., Yue W., Zhou H., Gelernter J., Malison R.T., Kalayasiri R., et al. Genome-wide association study of alcohol dependence in male Han Chinese and cross-ethnic polygenic risk score comparison. Transl. Psychiatry. 2019;9:249. doi: 10.1038/s41398-019-0586-3.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-019-0586-3) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6779867/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31591379/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Transl.%20Psychiatry&title=Genome-wide%20association%20study%20of%20alcohol%20dependence%20in%20male%20Han%20Chinese%20and%20cross-ethnic%20polygenic%20risk%20score%20comparison&author=Y.%20Sun&author=S.%20Chang&author=F.%20Wang&author=H.%20Sun&author=Z.%20Ni&volume=9&publication_year=2019&pages=249&pmid=31591379&doi=10.1038/s41398-019-0586-3&)

15. Reus V.I., Fochtmann L.J., Bukstein O. The American Psychiatric Association Practice Guideline for the Pharmacological Treatment of Patients with Alcohol Use Disorder. Am. J. Psychiatry. 2018;175:86–90. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2017.1750101.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2017.1750101) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29301420/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Psychiatry&title=The%20American%20Psychiatric%20Association%20Practice%20Guideline%20for%20the%20Pharmacological%20Treatment%20of%20Patients%20with%20Alcohol%20Use%20Disorder&author=V.I.%20Reus&author=L.J.%20Fochtmann&author=O.%20Bukstein&volume=175&publication_year=2018&pages=86-90&pmid=29301420&doi=10.1176/appi.ajp.2017.1750101&)

16. Roesner S., Hackl-Herrwerth A., Leucht S., Vecchi S., Srisurapanont M., Soyka M. Opioid antagonists for alcohol dependence. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2010;12 doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001867.pub3.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD001867.pub3) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21154349/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cochrane%20Database%20Syst.%20Rev.&title=Opioid%20antagonists%20for%20alcohol%20dependence&author=S.%20Roesner&author=A.%20Hackl-Herrwerth&author=S.%20Leucht&author=S.%20Vecchi&author=M.%20Srisurapanont&volume=12&publication_year=2010&pmid=21154349&doi=10.1002/14651858.CD001867.pub3&)

17. Schacht J.P., Anton R.F., Voronin K.E., Randall P.K., Li X., Henderson S., Myrick H. Interacting effects of naltrexone and OPRM1 and DAT1 variation on the neural response to alcohol cues. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013;38:414–422. doi: 10.1038/npp.2012.195.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2012.195) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3547192/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23032071/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuropsychopharmacology&title=Interacting%20effects%20of%20naltrexone%20and%20OPRM1%20and%20DAT1%20variation%20on%20the%20neural%20response%20to%20alcohol%20cues&author=J.P.%20Schacht&author=R.F.%20Anton&author=K.E.%20Voronin&author=P.K.%20Randall&author=X.%20Li&volume=38&publication_year=2013&pages=414-422&pmid=23032071&doi=10.1038/npp.2012.195&)

18. Schacht J.P., Randall P.K., Latham P.K., Voronin K.E., Book S.W., Myrick H., Anton R.F. Predictors of naltrexone response in a randomized trial: Reward-related brain activation, OPRM1 genotype, and smoking status. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2017;42:2640–2653. doi: 10.1038/npp.2017.74.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2017.74) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5686497/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28409564/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuropsychopharmacology&title=Predictors%20of%20naltrexone%20response%20in%20a%20randomized%20trial:%20Reward-related%20brain%20activation,%20OPRM1%20genotype,%20and%20smoking%20status&author=J.P.%20Schacht&author=P.K.%20Randall&author=P.K.%20Latham&author=K.E.%20Voronin&author=S.W.%20Book&volume=42&publication_year=2017&pages=2640-2653&pmid=28409564&doi=10.1038/npp.2017.74&)

19. Garbutt J.C., Greenblatt A.M., West S.L., Morgan L.C., Kampov-Polevoy A., Jordan H.S., Bobashev G.V. Clinical and biological moderators of response to naltrexone in alcohol dependence: A systematic review of the evidence. Addiction. 2014;109:1274–1284. doi: 10.1111/add.12557.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/add.12557) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24661324/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Addiction&title=Clinical%20and%20biological%20moderators%20of%20response%20to%20naltrexone%20in%20alcohol%20dependence:%20A%20systematic%20review%20of%20the%20evidence&author=J.C.%20Garbutt&author=A.M.%20Greenblatt&author=S.L.%20West&author=L.C.%20Morgan&author=A.%20Kampov-Polevoy&volume=109&publication_year=2014&pages=1274-1284&pmid=24661324&doi=10.1111/add.12557&)

20. Oluwoye O., Leickly E., Skalisky J., McPherson S., Hirchak K., Srebnik D., Roll J.M., Ries R.K., McDonell M.G. Serious Mental Illness in Heavy Drinkers Is Associated with Poor Treatment Outcomes in Outpatients with Co-occurring Disorders. Int. J. Ment. Health Addict. 2018;16:672–679. doi: 10.1007/s11469-017-9821-4.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11469-017-9821-4) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6027641/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29973859/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Ment.%20Health%20Addict.&title=Serious%20Mental%20Illness%20in%20Heavy%20Drinkers%20Is%20Associated%20with%20Poor%20Treatment%20Outcomes%20in%20Outpatients%20with%20Co-occurring%20Disorders&author=O.%20Oluwoye&author=E.%20Leickly&author=J.%20Skalisky&author=S.%20McPherson&author=K.%20Hirchak&volume=16&publication_year=2018&pages=672-679&pmid=29973859&doi=10.1007/s11469-017-9821-4&)

21. Castaldelli-Maia J.M., Silva N.R., Ventriglio A., Gil F., Torales J., Bhugra D., De Andrade A.G., Baldassin S. Relationship between family history of alcohol problems and different clusters of depressive symptoms. Ir. J. Psychol. Med. 2019:1–9. doi: 10.1017/ipm.2019.19.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1017/ipm.2019.19) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31130153/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ir.%20J.%20Psychol.%20Med.&title=Relationship%20between%20family%20history%20of%20alcohol%20problems%20and%20different%20clusters%20of%20depressive%20symptoms&author=J.M.%20Castaldelli-Maia&author=N.R.%20Silva&author=A.%20Ventriglio&author=F.%20Gil&author=J.%20Torales&publication_year=2019&pages=1-9&pmid=31130153&doi=10.1017/ipm.2019.19&)

22. Fond G., Bourbon A., Picot A., Boucekine M., Lançon C., Auquier P., Boyer L. Hazardous drinking is associated with hypnotic consumption in medical students in the BOURBON nationwide study: Psychological factors explored. Eur. Arch. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 2020;271:883–889. doi: 10.1007/s00406-020-01122-1.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00406-020-01122-1) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32274577/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur.%20Arch.%20Psychiatry%20Clin.%20Neurosci.&title=Hazardous%20drinking%20is%20associated%20with%20hypnotic%20consumption%20in%20medical%20students%20in%20the%20BOURBON%20nationwide%20study:%20Psychological%20factors%20explored&author=G.%20Fond&author=A.%20Bourbon&author=A.%20Picot&author=M.%20Boucekine&author=C.%20Lan%C3%A7on&volume=271&publication_year=2020&pages=883-889&pmid=32274577&doi=10.1007/s00406-020-01122-1&)

23. Simon J., Etienne A.M., Bouchard S., Quertemont E. Alcohol Craving in Heavy and Occasional Alcohol Drinkers After Cue Exposure in a Virtual Environment: The Role of the Sense of Presence. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2020;14:124. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2020.00124.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2020.00124) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7136534/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32296322/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front.%20Hum.%20Neurosci.&title=Alcohol%20Craving%20in%20Heavy%20and%20Occasional%20Alcohol%20Drinkers%20After%20Cue%20Exposure%20in%20a%20Virtual%20Environment:%20The%20Role%20of%20the%20Sense%20of%20Presence&author=J.%20Simon&author=A.M.%20Etienne&author=S.%20Bouchard&author=E.%20Quertemont&volume=14&publication_year=2020&pages=124&pmid=32296322&doi=10.3389/fnhum.2020.00124&)

24. Chen C.C., Kuo C.J., Tsai S.Y., Yin S.J. Relation of genotypes of alcohol metabolizing enzymes and mortality of liver diseases in patients with alcohol dependence. Addict. Biol. 2004;9:233–237. doi: 10.1080/13556210412331292550.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/13556210412331292550) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15511718/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Addict.%20Biol.&title=Relation%20of%20genotypes%20of%20alcohol%20metabolizing%20enzymes%20and%20mortality%20of%20liver%20diseases%20in%20patients%20with%20alcohol%20dependence&author=C.C.%20Chen&author=C.J.%20Kuo&author=S.Y.%20Tsai&author=S.J.%20Yin&volume=9&publication_year=2004&pages=233-237&pmid=15511718&doi=10.1080/13556210412331292550&)

25. Shin S., Stewart R., Ferri C.P., Kim J.M., Shin I.S., Kim S.W., Yang S.J., Yoon J.S. An investigation of associations between alcohol use disorder and polymorphisms on ALDH2, BDNF, 5-HTTLPR, and MTHFR genes in older Korean men. Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry. 2010;25:441–448. doi: 10.1002/gps.2358.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/gps.2358) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19637400/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Geriatr.%20Psychiatry.&title=An%20investigation%20of%20associations%20between%20alcohol%20use%20disorder%20and%20polymorphisms%20on%20ALDH2,%20BDNF,%205-HTTLPR,%20and%20MTHFR%20genes%20in%20older%20Korean%20men&author=S.%20Shin&author=R.%20Stewart&author=C.P.%20Ferri&author=J.M.%20Kim&author=I.S.%20Shin&volume=25&publication_year=2010&pages=441-448&pmid=19637400&doi=10.1002/gps.2358&)

26. Crawford A., Dalvie S., Lewis S., King A., Liberzon I., Fein G., Koenen K., Ramesar R., Stein D.J. Haplotype–based study of the association of alcohol and acetaldehyde-metabolising genes with alcohol dependence (with or without comorbid anxiety symptoms) in a Cape Mixed Ancestry population. Metab. Brain Dis. 2014;29:333–340. doi: 10.1007/s11011-014-9503-x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11011-014-9503-x) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4023075/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24567230/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Metab.%20Brain%20Dis.&title=Haplotype%E2%80%93based%20study%20of%20the%20association%20of%20alcohol%20and%20acetaldehyde-metabolising%20genes%20with%20alcohol%20dependence%20(with%20or%20without%20comorbid%20anxiety%20symptoms)%20in%20a%20Cape%20Mixed%20Ancestry%20population&author=A.%20Crawford&author=S.%20Dalvie&author=S.%20Lewis&author=A.%20King&author=I.%20Liberzon&volume=29&publication_year=2014&pages=333-340&pmid=24567230&doi=10.1007/s11011-014-9503-x&)

27. MWer S., Dykes D., Polesky H. A simple salting out procedure for extracting DNA from human nucleated cells. Nucleic. Acids. Res. 1988;16:1215. doi: 10.1093/nar/16.3.1215.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/16.3.1215) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC334765/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3344216/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic.%20Acids.%20Res.&title=A%20simple%20salting%20out%20procedure%20for%20extracting%20DNA%20from%20human%20nucleated%20cells&author=S.%20MWer&author=D.%20Dykes&author=H.%20Polesky&volume=16&publication_year=1988&pages=1215&pmid=3344216&doi=10.1093/nar/16.3.1215&)

28. Staudt A., Freyer-Adam J., Meyer C., Bischof G., John U., Baumann S. Does prior recall of past week alcohol use affect screening results for at-risk drinking? Findings from a ranndomized study. PLoS ONE. 2019;14:e0217595. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0217595.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0217595) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6548377/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31163053/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20ONE&title=Does%20prior%20recall%20of%20past%20week%20alcohol%20use%20affect%20screening%20results%20for%20at-risk%20drinking?%20Findings%20from%20a%20ranndomized%20study&author=A.%20Staudt&author=J.%20Freyer-Adam&author=C.%20Meyer&author=G.%20Bischof&author=U.%20John&volume=14&publication_year=2019&pages=e0217595&pmid=31163053&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0217595&)

29. Zill J.M., Christalle E., Meyer B., Härter M., Dirmaier J. The Effectiveness of an Internet Intervention Aimed at Reducing Alcohol Consumption in Adults. Dtsch. Arztebl. Int. 2019;116:127–137. doi: 10.3238/arztebl.2019.0127.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3238/arztebl.2019.0127) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6454801/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30940341/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Dtsch.%20Arztebl.%20Int.&title=The%20Effectiveness%20of%20an%20Internet%20Intervention%20Aimed%20at%20Reducing%20Alcohol%20Consumption%20in%20Adults&author=J.M.%20Zill&author=E.%20Christalle&author=B.%20Meyer&author=M.%20H%C3%A4rter&author=J.%20Dirmaier&volume=116&publication_year=2019&pages=127-137&pmid=30940341&doi=10.3238/arztebl.2019.0127&)

30. Kahler C.W., Pantalone D.W., Mastroleo N.R., Liu T., Bove G., Ramratnam B., Monti P.M., Mayer K.H. Motivational interviewing with personalized feedback to reduce alcohol use in HIV-infected men who have sex with men: A randomized controlled trial. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 2018;86:645–656. doi: 10.1037/ccp0000322.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1037/ccp0000322) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6061969/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30035581/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Consult.%20Clin.%20Psychol.&title=Motivational%20interviewing%20with%20personalized%20feedback%20to%20reduce%20alcohol%20use%20in%20HIV-infected%20men%20who%20have%20sex%20with%20men:%20A%20randomized%20controlled%20trial&author=C.W.%20Kahler&author=D.W.%20Pantalone&author=N.R.%20Mastroleo&author=T.%20Liu&author=G.%20Bove&volume=86&publication_year=2018&pages=645-656&pmid=30035581&doi=10.1037/ccp0000322&)

31. Jacobson S.W., Carter R.C., Molteno C.D., Meintjes E.M., Senekal M.S., Lindinger N.M., Dodge N.C., Zeisel S.H., Duggan C.P., Jacobson J.L. Feasibility and Acceptability of Maternal Choline Supplementation in Heavy Drinking Pregnant Women: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Clinical Trial. Alcohol Clin. Exp. Res. 2018;42:1315–1326. doi: 10.1111/acer.13768.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/acer.13768) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6028314/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29750366/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Alcohol%20Clin.%20Exp.%20Res.&title=Feasibility%20and%20Acceptability%20of%20Maternal%20Choline%20Supplementation%20in%20Heavy%20Drinking%20Pregnant%20Women:%20A%20Randomized,%20Double-Blind,%20Placebo-Controlled%20Clinical%20Trial&author=S.W.%20Jacobson&author=R.C.%20Carter&author=C.D.%20Molteno&author=E.M.%20Meintjes&author=M.S.%20Senekal&volume=42&publication_year=2018&pages=1315-1326&pmid=29750366&doi=10.1111/acer.13768&)

32. Edenberg H.J., McClintick J.N. Alcohol Dehydrogenases, Aldehyde Dehydrogenases, and Alcohol Use Disorders: A Critical Review. Alcohol Clin. Exp. Res. 2018;42:2281–2297. doi: 10.1111/acer.13904.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/acer.13904) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6286250/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30320893/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Alcohol%20Clin.%20Exp.%20Res.&title=Alcohol%20Dehydrogenases,%20Aldehyde%20Dehydrogenases,%20and%20Alcohol%20Use%20Disorders:%20A%20Critical%20Review&author=H.J.%20Edenberg&author=J.N.%20McClintick&volume=42&publication_year=2018&pages=2281-2297&pmid=30320893&doi=10.1111/acer.13904&)

33. Luczak S.E., Glatt S.J., Wall T.L. Meta-analyses of ALDH2 and ADH1B with alcohol dependence in Asians. Psychol. Bull. 2006;132:607–621. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.132.4.607.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.132.4.607) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16822169/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Psychol.%20Bull.&title=Meta-analyses%20of%20ALDH2%20and%20ADH1B%20with%20alcohol%20dependence%20in%20Asians&author=S.E.%20Luczak&author=S.J.%20Glatt&author=T.L.%20Wall&volume=132&publication_year=2006&pages=607-621&pmid=16822169&doi=10.1037/0033-2909.132.4.607&)

34. Li D., Zhao H., Gelernter J. Strong association of the alcohol dehydrogenase 1B gene (ADH1B) with alcohol dependence and alcohol-induced medical diseases. Biol. Psychiatry. 2011;70:504–512. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.02.024.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.02.024) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3142297/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21497796/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biol.%20Psychiatry&title=Strong%20association%20of%20the%20alcohol%20dehydrogenase%201B%20gene%20(ADH1B)%20with%20alcohol%20dependence%20and%20alcohol-induced%20medical%20diseases&author=D.%20Li&author=H.%20Zhao&author=J.%20Gelernter&volume=70&publication_year=2011&pages=504-512&pmid=21497796&doi=10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.02.024&)

35. Bierut L.J., Goate A.M., Breslau N., Johnson E.O., Bertelsen S., Fox L., Agrawal A., Bucholz K.K., Grucza R., Hesselbrock V., et al. ADH1B is associated with alcohol dependence and alcohol consumption in populations of European and African ancestry. Mol. Psychiatry. 2012;17:445–450. doi: 10.1038/mp.2011.124.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2011.124) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3252425/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21968928/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Psychiatry&title=ADH1B%20is%20associated%20with%20alcohol%20dependence%20and%20alcohol%20consumption%20in%20populations%20of%20European%20and%20African%20ancestry&author=L.J.%20Bierut&author=A.M.%20Goate&author=N.%20Breslau&author=E.O.%20Johnson&author=S.%20Bertelsen&volume=17&publication_year=2012&pages=445-450&pmid=21968928&doi=10.1038/mp.2011.124&)

36. Ray L.A., Bujarski S., Chin P.F., Miotto K. Pharmacogenetics of naltrexone in asian americans: A randomized placebo-controlled laboratory study. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2012;37:445–455. doi: 10.1038/npp.2011.192.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2011.192) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3242306/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21900886/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuropsychopharmacology&title=Pharmacogenetics%20of%20naltrexone%20in%20asian%20americans:%20A%20randomized%20placebo-controlled%20laboratory%20study&author=L.A.%20Ray&author=S.%20Bujarski&author=P.F.%20Chin&author=K.%20Miotto&volume=37&publication_year=2012&pages=445-455&pmid=21900886&doi=10.1038/npp.2011.192&)

37. Bujarski S., Lau A.S., Lee S.S., Ray L.A. Genetic and Environmental Predictors of Alcohol Use in Asian American Young Adults. J. Stud. Alcohol Drugs. 2015;76:690–699. doi: 10.15288/jsad.2015.76.690.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.15288/jsad.2015.76.690) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4714821/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26402349/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Stud.%20Alcohol%20Drugs&title=Genetic%20and%20Environmental%20Predictors%20of%20Alcohol%20Use%20in%20Asian%20American%20Young%20Adults&author=S.%20Bujarski&author=A.S.%20Lau&author=S.S.%20Lee&author=L.A.%20Ray&volume=76&publication_year=2015&pages=690-699&pmid=26402349&doi=10.15288/jsad.2015.76.690&)

38. Brunoni A.R., Carracedo A., Amigo O.M., Pellicer A.L., Talib L., Carvalho A.F., Lotufo P.A., Benseñor I.M., Gattaz W., Cappi C. Association of BDNF, HTR2A, TPH1, SLC6A4, and COMT polymorphisms with tDCS and escitalopram efficacy: Ancillary analysis of a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Braz. J. Psychiatry. 2020;42:128–135. doi: 10.1590/1516-4446-2019-0620.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1590/1516-4446-2019-0620) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7115450/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31721892/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Braz.%20J.%20Psychiatry&title=Association%20of%20BDNF,%20HTR2A,%20TPH1,%20SLC6A4,%20and%20COMT%20polymorphisms%20with%20tDCS%20and%20escitalopram%20efficacy:%20Ancillary%20analysis%20of%20a%20double-blind,%20placebo-controlled%20trial&author=A.R.%20Brunoni&author=A.%20Carracedo&author=O.M.%20Amigo&author=A.L.%20Pellicer&author=L.%20Talib&volume=42&publication_year=2020&pages=128-135&pmid=31721892&doi=10.1590/1516-4446-2019-0620&)

39. Verholleman A., Victorri-Vigneau C., Laforgue E., Derkinderen P., Verstuyft C., Grall-Bronnec M. Naltrexone Use in Treating Hypersexuality Induced by Dopamine Replacement Therapy: Impact of OPRM1 A/G Polymorphism on Its Effectiveness. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020;21:3002. doi: 10.3390/ijms21083002.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21083002) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7215378/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32344532/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Mol.%20Sci.&title=Naltrexone%20Use%20in%20Treating%20Hypersexuality%20Induced%20by%20Dopamine%20Replacement%20Therapy:%20Impact%20of%20OPRM1%20A/G%20Polymorphism%20on%20Its%20Effectiveness&author=A.%20Verholleman&author=C.%20Victorri-Vigneau&author=E.%20Laforgue&author=P.%20Derkinderen&author=C.%20Verstuyft&volume=21&publication_year=2020&pages=3002&pmid=32344532&doi=10.3390/ijms21083002&)

40. Van der Schans J., Hak E., Postma M., Breuning L., Brouwers J.R., Ditters K., Jansen P.A., Kok R.M., Maring J.G., van Marum R., et al. Effects of Pharmacogenetic Screening for CYP2D6 Among Elderly Starting Therapy With Nortriptyline or Venlafaxine: A Pragmatic Randomized Controlled Trial (CYSCE Trial) J. Clin. Psychopharmacol. 2019;39:583–590. doi: 10.1097/JCP.0000000000001129.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/JCP.0000000000001129) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31688392/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Clin.%20Psychopharmacol.&title=Effects%20of%20Pharmacogenetic%20Screening%20for%20CYP2D6%20Among%20Elderly%20Starting%20Therapy%20With%20Nortriptyline%20or%20Venlafaxine:%20A%20Pragmatic%20Randomized%20Controlled%20Trial%20(CYSCE%20Trial)&author=J.%20Van%20der%20Schans&author=E.%20Hak&author=M.%20Postma&author=L.%20Breuning&author=J.R.%20Brouwers&volume=39&publication_year=2019&pages=583-590&pmid=31688392&doi=10.1097/JCP.0000000000001129&)

41. van Westrhenen R., Aitchison K.J., Ingelman-Sundberg M., Jukić M.M. Pharmacogenomics of Antidepressant and Antipsychotic Treatment: How Far Have We Got and Where Are We Going? Front. Psychiatry. 2020;11:94. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00094.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00094) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7080976/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32226396/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front.%20Psychiatry&title=Pharmacogenomics%20of%20Antidepressant%20and%20Antipsychotic%20Treatment:%20How%20Far%20Have%20We%20Got%20and%20Where%20Are%20We%20Going?&author=R.%20van%20Westrhenen&author=K.J.%20Aitchison&author=M.%20Ingelman-Sundberg&author=M.M.%20Juki%C4%87&volume=11&publication_year=2020&pages=94&pmid=32226396&doi=10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00094&)

42. Hartwell E.E., Feinn R., Morris P.E., Gelernter J., Krystal J., Arias A.J., Hoffman M., Petrakis I., Gueorguieva R., Schacht J.P., et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis of the moderating effect of rs1799971 in OPRM1, the mu-opioid receptor gene, on response to naltrexone treatment of alcohol use disorder. Addiction. 2020;115:1426–1437. doi: 10.1111/add.14975.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/add.14975) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7340566/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31961981/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Addiction&title=Systematic%20review%20and%20meta-analysis%20of%20the%20moderating%20effect%20of%20rs1799971%20in%20OPRM1,%20the%20mu-opioid%20receptor%20gene,%20on%20response%20to%20naltrexone%20treatment%20of%20alcohol%20use%20disorder&author=E.E.%20Hartwell&author=R.%20Feinn&author=P.E.%20Morris&author=J.%20Gelernter&author=J.%20Krystal&volume=115&publication_year=2020&pages=1426-1437&pmid=31961981&doi=10.1111/add.14975&)

43. Hendershot C.S., Dermody S.S., Wardell J.D., Zaso M.J., Kennedy J.L., Stoner S.A. OPRM1 Moderates Daily Associations of Naltrexone Adherence With Alcohol Consumption: Preliminary Evidence From a Mobile Health Trial. Alcohol Clin. Exp. Res. 2020;44:983–991. doi: 10.1111/acer.14300.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/acer.14300) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8758337/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32020635/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Alcohol%20Clin.%20Exp.%20Res.&title=OPRM1%20Moderates%20Daily%20Associations%20of%20Naltrexone%20Adherence%20With%20Alcohol%20Consumption:%20Preliminary%20Evidence%20From%20a%20Mobile%20Health%20Trial&author=C.S.%20Hendershot&author=S.S.%20Dermody&author=J.D.%20Wardell&author=M.J.%20Zaso&author=J.L.%20Kennedy&volume=44&publication_year=2020&pages=983-991&pmid=32020635&doi=10.1111/acer.14300&)

44. Stewart S.H., Walitzer K.S., Blanco J., Swiatek D., Hughes L.P., Quiñones-Lombraña A., Shyhalla K. Medication-enhanced behavior therapy for alcohol use disorder: Naltrexone, Alcoholics Anonymous Facilitation, and OPRM1 genetic variation. J. Subst. Abuse. Treat. 2019;104:7–14. doi: 10.1016/j.jsat.2019.05.004.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsat.2019.05.004) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6684329/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31370987/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Subst.%20Abuse.%20Treat.&title=Medication-enhanced%20behavior%20therapy%20for%20alcohol%20use%20disorder:%20Naltrexone,%20Alcoholics%20Anonymous%20Facilitation,%20and%20OPRM1%20genetic%20variation&author=S.H.%20Stewart&author=K.S.%20Walitzer&author=J.%20Blanco&author=D.%20Swiatek&author=L.P.%20Hughes&volume=104&publication_year=2019&pages=7-14&pmid=31370987&doi=10.1016/j.jsat.2019.05.004&)

45. Wang J.C., Hinrichs A.L., Bertelsen S., Stock H., Budde J.P., Dick D.M., Bucholz K.K., Rice J., Saccone N., Edenberg H.J., et al. Functional variants in TAS2R38 and TAS2R16 influence alcohol consumption in high-risk families of African-American origin. Alcohol Clin. Exp. Res. 2007;31:209–215. doi: 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2006.00297.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-0277.2006.00297.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17250611/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Alcohol%20Clin.%20Exp.%20Res.&title=Functional%20variants%20in%20TAS2R38%20and%20TAS2R16%20influence%20alcohol%20consumption%20in%20high-risk%20families%20of%20African-American%20origin&author=J.C.%20Wang&author=A.L.%20Hinrichs&author=S.%20Bertelsen&author=H.%20Stock&author=J.P.%20Budde&volume=31&publication_year=2007&pages=209-215&pmid=17250611&doi=10.1111/j.1530-0277.2006.00297.x&)

46. Yu H.S., Oyama T., Isse T., Kitagawa K., Tanaka M., Kawamoto T. Formation of acetaldehyde-derived DNA adducts due to alcohol exposure. Chem. Biol. Interact. 2010;188:367–375. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2010.08.005.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbi.2010.08.005) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20813101/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Chem.%20Biol.%20Interact.&title=Formation%20of%20acetaldehyde-derived%20DNA%20adducts%20due%20to%20alcohol%20exposure&author=H.S.%20Yu&author=T.%20Oyama&author=T.%20Isse&author=K.%20Kitagawa&author=M.%20Tanaka&volume=188&publication_year=2010&pages=367-375&pmid=20813101&doi=10.1016/j.cbi.2010.08.005&)

47. Setodji C.M., Watkins K.E., Hunter S.B., McCullough C., Stein B.D., Osilla K.C., Ober A.J. Initiation and engagement as mechanisms for change caused by collaborative care in opioid and alcohol use disorders. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2018;192:67–73. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2018.07.027.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2018.07.027) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6334843/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30223190/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Drug%20Alcohol%20Depend.&title=Initiation%20and%20engagement%20as%20mechanisms%20for%20change%20caused%20by%20collaborative%20care%20in%20opioid%20and%20alcohol%20use%20disorders&author=C.M.%20Setodji&author=K.E.%20Watkins&author=S.B.%20Hunter&author=C.%20McCullough&author=B.D.%20Stein&volume=192&publication_year=2018&pages=67-73&pmid=30223190&doi=10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2018.07.027&)

48. Smart R., Osilla K.C., Jonsson L., Paddock S.M. Differences in alcohol cognitions, consumption, and consequences among first-time DUI offenders who co-use alcohol and marijuana. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2018;191:187–194. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2018.07.005.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2018.07.005) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6309328/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30130715/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Drug%20Alcohol%20Depend.&title=Differences%20in%20alcohol%20cognitions,%20consumption,%20and%20consequences%20among%20first-time%20DUI%20offenders%20who%20co-use%20alcohol%20and%20marijuana&author=R.%20Smart&author=K.C.%20Osilla&author=L.%20Jonsson&author=S.M.%20Paddock&volume=191&publication_year=2018&pages=187-194&pmid=30130715&doi=10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2018.07.005&)

49. Bernhardt N., Nebe S., Pooseh S., Sebold M., Sommer C., Birkenstock J., Zimmermann U.S., Heinz A., Smolka M.N. Impulsive Decision Making in Young Adult Social Drinkers and Detoxified Alcohol-Dependent Patients: A Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Study. Alcohol Clin. Exp. Res. 2017;41:1794–1807. doi: 10.1111/acer.13481.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/acer.13481) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28815629/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Alcohol%20Clin.%20Exp.%20Res.&title=Impulsive%20Decision%20Making%20in%20Young%20Adult%20Social%20Drinkers%20and%20Detoxified%20Alcohol-Dependent%20Patients:%20A%20Cross-Sectional%20and%20Longitudinal%20Study&author=N.%20Bernhardt&author=S.%20Nebe&author=S.%20Pooseh&author=M.%20Sebold&author=C.%20Sommer&volume=41&publication_year=2017&pages=1794-1807&pmid=28815629&doi=10.1111/acer.13481&)

50. Watkins K.E., Ober A.J., Lamp K., Lind M., Setodji C., Osilla K.C., Hunter S.B., McCullough C.M., Becker K., Iyiewuare P.O., et al. Collaborative Care for Opioid and Alcohol Use Disorders in Primary Care: The SUMMIT Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Intern. Med. 2017;177:1480–1488. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.3947.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.3947) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5710213/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28846769/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=JAMA%20Intern.%20Med.&title=Collaborative%20Care%20for%20Opioid%20and%20Alcohol%20Use%20Disorders%20in%20Primary%20Care:%20The%20SUMMIT%20Randomized%20Clinical%20Trial&author=K.E.%20Watkins&author=A.J.%20Ober&author=K.%20Lamp&author=M.%20Lind&author=C.%20Setodji&volume=177&publication_year=2017&pages=1480-1488&pmid=28846769&doi=10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.3947&)

51. Lai D., Wetherill L., Bertelsen S., Carey C.E., Kamarajan C., Kapoor M., Meyers J.L., Anokhin A.P., Bennett D.A., Bucholz K.K., et al. Genome-wide association studies of alcohol dependence, DSM-IV criterion count and individual criteria. Genes Brain Behav. 2019;18:e12579. doi: 10.1111/gbb.12579.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/gbb.12579) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6612573/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31090166/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genes%20Brain%20Behav.&title=Genome-wide%20association%20studies%20of%20alcohol%20dependence,%20DSM-IV%20criterion%20count%20and%20individual%20criteria&author=D.%20Lai&author=L.%20Wetherill&author=S.%20Bertelsen&author=C.E.%20Carey&author=C.%20Kamarajan&volume=18&publication_year=2019&pages=e12579&pmid=31090166&doi=10.1111/gbb.12579&)

52. Yokoyama A., Yokoyama T., Matsui T., Mizukami T., Kimura M., Matsushita S., Higuchi S., Maruyama K. Impacts of interactions between ADH1B and ALDH2 genotypes on alcohol flushing, alcohol reeking on the day after drinking, and age distribution in Japanese alcohol-dependent men. Pharmacogenet. Genomics. 2020;30:54–60. doi: 10.1097/FPC.0000000000000395.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0000000000000395) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32084087/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenet.%20Genomics&title=Impacts%20of%20interactions%20between%20ADH1B%20and%20ALDH2%20genotypes%20on%20alcohol%20flushing,%20alcohol%20reeking%20on%20the%20day%20after%20drinking,%20and%20age%20distribution%20in%20Japanese%20alcohol-dependent%20men&author=A.%20Yokoyama&author=T.%20Yokoyama&author=T.%20Matsui&author=T.%20Mizukami&author=M.%20Kimura&volume=30&publication_year=2020&pages=54-60&pmid=32084087&doi=10.1097/FPC.0000000000000395&)

53. Fairbanks J., Umbreit A., Kolla B.P., Karpyak V.M., Schneekloth T.D., Loukianova L.L., Sinha S. Evidenced-Based Pharmacotherapies for Alcohol Use Disorder: Clinical Pearls. Mayo Clin. Proc. 2020;95:1964–1977. doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.01.030.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.01.030) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32446635/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mayo%20Clin.%20Proc.&title=Evidenced-Based%20Pharmacotherapies%20for%20Alcohol%20Use%20Disorder:%20Clinical%20Pearls&author=J.%20Fairbanks&author=A.%20Umbreit&author=B.P.%20Kolla&author=V.M.%20Karpyak&author=T.D.%20Schneekloth&volume=95&publication_year=2020&pages=1964-1977&pmid=32446635&doi=10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.01.030&)

54. Srisurapanont M., Jarusuraisin N. Opioid antagonists for alcohol dependence. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2005;1:1867. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001867.pub2.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD001867.pub2) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15674887/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cochrane%20Database%20Syst.%20Rev.&title=Opioid%20antagonists%20for%20alcohol%20dependence&author=M.%20Srisurapanont&author=N.%20Jarusuraisin&volume=1&publication_year=2005&pages=1867&pmid=15674887&doi=10.1002/14651858.CD001867.pub2&)

55. Park B., Kim J.H., Lee E.S., Jung S.Y., Lee S.Y., Kang H.S., Lee E.G., Han J.H. Role of aldehyde dehydrogenases, alcohol dehydrogenase 1B genotype, alcohol consumption, and their combination in breast cancer in East-Asian women. Sci. Rep. 2020;10:6564. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-62361-9.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-62361-9) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7162854/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32300124/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sci.%20Rep.&title=Role%20of%20aldehyde%20dehydrogenases,%20alcohol%20dehydrogenase%201B%20genotype,%20alcohol%20consumption,%20and%20their%20combination%20in%20breast%20cancer%20in%20East-Asian%20women&author=B.%20Park&author=J.H.%20Kim&author=E.S.%20Lee&author=S.Y.%20Jung&author=S.Y.%20Lee&volume=10&publication_year=2020&pages=6564&pmid=32300124&doi=10.1038/s41598-020-62361-9&)

56. Sakaue S., Akiyama M., Hirata M., Matsuda K., Murakami Y., Kubo M., Kamatani Y., Okada Y. Functional variants in ADH1B and ALDH2 are non-additively associated with all-cause 6ortality in Japanese population. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 2020;28:378–382. doi: 10.1038/s41431-019-0518-y.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-019-0518-y) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7028931/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31558841/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur.%20J.%20Hum.%20Genet.&title=Functional%20variants%20in%20ADH1B%20and%20ALDH2%20are%20non-additively%20associated%20with%20all-cause%206ortality%20in%20Japanese%20population&author=S.%20Sakaue&author=M.%20Akiyama&author=M.%20Hirata&author=K.%20Matsuda&author=Y.%20Murakami&volume=28&publication_year=2020&pages=378-382&pmid=31558841&doi=10.1038/s41431-019-0518-y&)

57. Shiotani A., Ishikawa H., Mutoh M., Takeshita T., Nakamura T., Morimoto K., Sakai T., Wakabayashi K., Matsuura N. Impact of Diarrhea after Drinking on Colorectal Tumor Risk: A Case Control Study. Asian Pac. J. Cancer Prev. 2019;20:795–799. doi: 10.31557/APJCP.2019.20.3.795.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.31557/APJCP.2019.20.3.795) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6825756/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30909690/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Asian%20Pac.%20J.%20Cancer%20Prev.&title=Impact%20of%20Diarrhea%20after%20Drinking%20on%20Colorectal%20Tumor%20Risk:%20A%20Case%20Control%20Study&author=A.%20Shiotani&author=H.%20Ishikawa&author=M.%20Mutoh&author=T.%20Takeshita&author=T.%20Nakamura&volume=20&publication_year=2019&pages=795-799&pmid=30909690&doi=10.31557/APJCP.2019.20.3.795&)

58. Zaso M.J., Goodhines P.A., Wall T.L., Park A. Meta-Analysis on Associations of Alcohol Metabolism Genes With Alcohol Use Disorder in East Asians. Alcohol Alcohol. 2019;54:216–224. doi: 10.1093/alcalc/agz011.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/alcalc/agz011) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6516434/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30834931/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Alcohol%20Alcohol.&title=Meta-Analysis%20on%20Associations%20of%20Alcohol%20Metabolism%20Genes%20With%20Alcohol%20Use%20Disorder%20in%20East%20Asians&author=M.J.%20Zaso&author=P.A.%20Goodhines&author=T.L.%20Wall&author=A.%20Park&volume=54&publication_year=2019&pages=216-224&pmid=30834931&doi=10.1093/alcalc/agz011&)
