# Effects of Genetic Polymorphisms of CYP2B6 on the Pharmacokinetics of Bupropion and Hydroxybupropion in Healthy Chinese Subjects.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Hui Ma, Wenping Zhang, Xiaoying Yang, Yuxin Zhang, Shijie Wei, Hao Zhang, Yanni Ma, Hongwan Dang
**Journal:** Medical science monitor : international medical journal of experimental and clinical research
**Year:** 2018
**PMID:** 29637923

## Abstract

BACKGROUND Bupropion (BUP) is an antidepressant and its pharmacological activity is mediated by its major metabolite, hydroxybupropion (HBUP). We investigated the effects of genetic polymorphisms of CYP2B6 on BUP and HBUP to provide certain evidence on the clinical rational administration of BUP. MATERIAL AND METHODS Plasma BUP and HBUP concentrations were assayed using high performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS). RESULTS A total of 23 healthy volunteers (eleven participants with CYP2B6*1/*1, 7 participants with CYP2B6*1/*6, 3 participants with CYP2B6*4/*6, and 2 participants with CYP2B6*1/*4) received orally administered 150 mg of BUP according to protocol. Blood samples were obtained up to 96 hours after administration. The whole blood was subject to genotyping by polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP). The concentration-time curve (AUC(0→96)), maximum plasma concentration (Cmax), and terminal half-life (t1/2) values of BUP in CYP2B6*1/*4 were lower than those of CYP2B6*1/*1. By contrast, the time to Cmax (tmax) value of the former was higher than that of the latter. The HBUP AUC(0→96) values in CYP2B6*4/*6 and CYP2B6*1/*4 increased to values 1.12-fold and 1.98-fold, compared with CYP2B6*1/*1 carriers. However, the HBUP AUC(0→96) value in CYP2B6*1/*1 was 1.51-fold higher than that in CYP2B6*1/*6. Similarly, the HBUP Cmax values in CYP2B6*4/*6 and CYP2B6*1/*4 increased by 1.12-fold and 1.97-fold, whereas the HBUP Cmax value in CYP2B6*1/*6 decreased to a value 1.64-fold lower than that in CYP2B6*1/*1. CONCLUSIONS Genetic polymorphisms of CYP2B6 influence the pharmacokinetic parameters of BUP and HBUP and thus establish rational BUP administration for Chinese patients in clinical settings.
