# A common novel CYP2C19 gene variant causes ultrarapid drug metabolism relevant for the drug response to proton pump inhibitors and antidepressants.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Sarah C Sim, Carl Risinger, Marja-Liisa Dahl, Eleni Aklillu, Magnus Christensen, Leif Bertilsson, Magnus Ingelman-Sundberg
**Journal:** Clinical pharmacology and therapeutics
**Year:** 2006
**PMID:** 16413245

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE:** Many drugs, including proton pump inhibitors and certain antidepressants, are metabolized by the polymorphic cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C19 enzyme. A significant portion of extensive metabolizers do not reach appropriate drug levels, and our objective was to investigate any genetic background.

**METHODS:** The 5'-flanking region of the CYP2C19 gene from subjects with rapid omeprazole metabolism was sequenced, and CYP2C19 phenotype-genotype associations were analyzed in Swedish (n = 107) and Ethiopian (n = 126) extensive metabolizers. The relationship of the metabolic ratio of omeprazole (omeprazole/5-hydroxyomeprazole in plasma 3 hours after drug intake) with the area under the plasma concentration-time curve was used for prediction studies. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays were conducted by use of human nuclear protein extracts. Hepatic reporter vector transfections were carried out in CD1 mice.

**RESULTS:** We identified a novel allele (CYP2C19*17) carrying -806C>T and -3402C>T, with a frequency of 18% in both Swedes and Ethiopians and 4% in Chinese subjects. In Swedes the metabolic ratio of omeprazole was higher in subjects homozygous for CYP2C19*1 (median, 0.50 [interquartile range, 0.37-0.73]) than in those homozygous for CYP2C19*17 (median, 0.25 [interquartile range, 0.15-0.33]) (P = .010). In Ethiopians a similar difference in the S/R-mephenytoin ratio was observed between individuals homozygous for CYP2C19*1 (median, 0.20 [interquartile range, 0.12-0.37]) and those homozygous for CYP2C19*17 (median, 0.05 [interquartile range, 0.03-0.06]) (P = .013). Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed specific binding of human hepatic nuclear proteins to an element carrying -806T but not -806C. Reporter vector experiments showed an increased transcriptional activity of the CYP2C19*17 allele in vivo in mice. Predictions revealed that CYP2C19*17 homozygotes would attain 35% to 40% lower omeprazole area under the plasma concentration-time curve values than subjects homozygous for CYP2C19*1 taking standard doses of omeprazole.

**CONCLUSION:** CYP2C19*17 is likely to cause therapeutic failures in drug treatment with, for example, proton pump inhibitors and antidepressants.
