# Association of genetic polymorphisms of CYP 2C19 with hypertension in a Chinese Han population.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Yu Ma, Wen Ni, Wenzhong Zhu, Yuanchang Xiong, Xiaoming Deng
**Journal:** Blood pressure
**Year:** 2011
**PMID:** 21332417

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVES:** Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C19 is expressed in vascular endothelium and metabolizes arachidonic acid to biologically active epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs), which play a centralrole in regulating renal tubular fluid-electrolyte transport and vascular tone. The purpose of this study is to explore the relationship between the genetic polymorphism and hypertension risk in a Chinese Han population.

**METHODS:** There were 1120 Chinese Han hypertension patients and 1249 age- and sex-matched control subjects genotyped for two tagging single nucleotide polymorphism (rs10509676 and rs11568732) of the human CYP2C19 gene by the use of polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis. Haplotypes were constructed and their frequencies compared between the hypertension patients and the controls.

**RESULTS:** The AA genotype of rs10509676 was found more frequently in the hypertension group than in the control group (p < 0.001). The frequency of the A-G haplotype was significantly higher in hypertensive patients than in control subjects (p < 0.001). The frequency of the T-T genotype was markedly higher in control subjects than in hypertensive patients (p < 0.001).

**CONCLUSIONS:** The present results indicate that hypertension is associated with the AA genotype of rs10509676 in the human CYP2C19 gene. The A-G haplotype appears to be a risk factor and the T-T haplotype may be a protective factor of hypertension in Chinese Han people.
