# Cytochrome P450 2C19 polymorphism, suboptimal reperfusion and all-cause mortality in patients with acute myocardial infarction.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Lukasz A Małek, Jakub Przyłuski, Mateusz Spiewak, Mariusz Kłopotowski, Grażyna Kostrzewa, Mariusz Kruk, Rafał Płoski, Adam Witkowski, Witold Rużyłło
**Journal:** Cardiology
**Year:** 2010
**PMID:** 20924183

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVES:** To determine whether the 681 G>A (*2) polymorphism of cytochrome P450 (CYP2C19) is related to suboptimal reperfusion and mortality in patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) pretreated with clopidogrel.

**METHODS:** The study included 276 consecutive patients with AMI in whom percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with stenting was attempted. Four-year follow-up for all-cause mortality was obtained.

**RESULTS:** There were 15 failed procedures (5.4%). In the remaining 261 patients, suboptimal reperfusion (post-PCI TIMI flow <3) was observed in 12.6% of the cases. There were 56 carriers (50 heterozygous and 6 homozygous) of CYP2C19*2. The prevalence of carriers in patients with suboptimal flow was 39.4% in comparison to 18.9% in the other patients (p = 0.01). Independent predictors of suboptimal reperfusion were initial TIMI flow ≤1 (OR = 5.9, 95% CI 2.2-16.2, p = 0.001) and CYP2C19*2 (OR = 2.9, 95% CI 1.3-6.6, p = 0.01). Thirty patients died during follow-up (11.5%). Four-year mortality tended to be higher in carriers of CYP2C19*2 (17.9%) versus non-carriers (9.8%; p = 0.09), but the only independent predictors of death were age (HR = 2.0, 95% CI = 1.4-2.8, p = 0.0001) and suboptimal reperfusion (HR = 3.6, 95% CI 1.5-8.8, p = 0.004).

**CONCLUSIONS:** The CYP2C19*2 allele is an independent predictor of suboptimal reperfusion in patients with AMI undergoing PCI with stenting after pretreatment with clopidogrel and may increase the risk of all-cause mortality.
