# The CYP2C19*17 genotype is associated with lower imipramine plasma concentrations in a large group of depressed patients.

## Metadata
**Authors:** P W Schenk, M van Vliet, R A A Mathot, T van Gelder, A G Vulto, M A C van Fessem, S Verploegh-Van Rij, J Lindemans, J A Bruijn, R H N van Schaik
**Journal:** The pharmacogenomics journal
**Year:** 2010
**PMID:** 19884907

## Abstract

CYP2C19 converts the tricyclic antidepressant imipramine to its active metabolite desipramine, which is subsequently inactivated by CYP2D6. The novel CYP2C19*17 allele causes ultrarapid metabolism of CYP2C19 substrates. We genotyped 178 depressed patients on imipramine for CYP2C19*17, and measured steady-state imipramine and desipramine plasma concentrations. Mean dose-corrected imipramine plasma concentration was significantly dependent on CYP2C19 genotype (Kruskal-Wallis test, P=0.01), with circa 30% lower levels in CYP2C19*17/*17 individuals compared with CYP2C19*1/*1 (wild-type) patients. The mean dose-corrected imipramine+desipramine plasma concentrations and imipramine/desipramine ratios were not significantly different between genotype subgroups (Kruskal-Wallis tests, P>or=0.12). In a multivariate analysis, we found a significant, but limited effect (P=0.035, eta(2)=0.031) of the CYP2C19*17 genotype on imipramine+desipramine concentrations. Although the CYP2C19*17 allele is associated with a significantly increased metabolism of imipramine, CYP2C19*17 genotyping will, in our view, not importantly contribute to dose management of patients on imipramine therapy guided by imipramine+desipramine plasma concentrations.
