# Genetic polymorphisms of human organic anion transporters OATP-C (SLC21A6) and OATP-B (SLC21A9): allele frequencies in the Japanese population and functional analysis.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Takashi Nozawa, Miki Nakajima, Ikumi Tamai, Kumiko Noda, Jun-Ichi Nezu, Yoshimichi Sai, Akira Tsuji, Tsuyoshi Yokoi
**Journal:** The Journal of pharmacology and experimental therapeutics
**Year:** 2002
**PMID:** 12130747

## Abstract

Genetic polymorphisms of human organic anion transporting polypeptides OATP-C (SLC21A6) and OATP-B (SLC21A9) in the Japanese population were analyzed. The allele frequencies of OATP-C*1a, OATP-C*1b (N130D), OATP-C*1c (R152K and D241N), and OATP-C*5 (V174A) were 35.2, 53.7, 0, and 0.7%, respectively, in 267 healthy Japanese subjects. In the OATP-C gene, we found a novel allele called OATP-C*15 possessing two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), N130D and V174A, simultaneously. The allele frequency of OATP-C*15 was 3.0%. The allele frequencies of OATP-B*1, OATP-B*2 (T392I), and OATP-B*3 (S486F) were 69.1, 0, and 30.9%, respectively. For functional analysis, each OATP-C and OATP-B allele was expressed in human embryonic kidney (HEK293) cells, and the kinetics of uptake of [(3)H]estrone-3-sulfate was determined. In the case of OATP-C alleles, no significant alteration in K(m) or V(max) values of [(3)H]estrone-3-sulfate uptake was observed, even when the V(max) values were corrected for the expression levels of OATP-C protein. In contrast, V(max), corrected with the expression level of OATP-B*3, was decreased to 42.5% of OATP-B*1, whereas the K(m) values were comparable. Since the frequency of the OATP-B*3 allele was high (30.9%) in our subjects, the SNP of S486F may affect the physiological function and/or pharmacological effects of OATP-B substrates in vivo.
