# Pharmacogenetics in American Indian populations: analysis of CYP2D6, CYP3A4, CYP3A5, and CYP2C9 in the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Alison Fohner, LeeAnna I Muzquiz, Melissa A Austin, Andrea Gaedigk, Adam Gordon, Timothy Thornton, Mark J Rieder, Mark A Pershouse, Elizabeth A Putnam, Kevin Howlett, Patrick Beatty, Kenneth E Thummel, Erica L Woodahl
**Journal:** Pharmacogenetics and genomics
**Year:** 2013
**PMID:** 23778323

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVES:** Cytochrome P450 enzymes play a dominant role in drug elimination and variation in these genes is a major source of interindividual differences in drug response. Little is known, however, about pharmacogenetic variation in American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations. We have developed a partnership with the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes (CSKT) in northwestern Montana to address this knowledge gap.

**METHODS:** We resequenced CYP2D6 in 187 CSKT individuals and CYP3A4, CYP3A5, and CYP2C9 in 94 CSKT individuals.

**RESULTS:** We identified 67 variants in CYP2D6, 15 in CYP3A4, 10 in CYP3A5, and 41 in CYP2C9. The most common CYP2D6 alleles were CYP2D6*4 and *41 (20.86 and 11.23%, respectively). CYP2D6*3, *5, *6, *9, *10, *17, *28, *33, *35, *49, *1xN, *2xN, and *4xN frequencies were less than 2%. CYP3A5*3, CYP3A4*1G, and *1B were detected with frequencies of 92.47, 26.81, and 2.20%, respectively. Allelic variation in CYP2C9 was low: CYP2C9*2 (5.17%) and *3 (2.69%). In general, allele frequencies in CYP2D6, CYP2C9, and CYP3A5 were similar to those observed in European Americans. There was, however, a marked divergence in CYP3A4 for the CYP3A4*1G allele. We also observed low levels of linkage between CYP3A4*1G and CYP3A5*1 in the CSKT. The combination of nonfunctional CYP3A5*3 and putative reduced function CYP3A4*1G alleles may predict diminished clearance of CYP3A substrates.

**CONCLUSION:** These results highlight the importance of carrying out pharmacogenomic research in AI/AN populations and show that extrapolation from other populations is not appropriate. This information could help optimize drug therapy for the CSKT population.
