# Variability of warfarin dose response associated with CYP2C9 and VKORC1 gene polymorphisms in Chinese patients.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Changqing Ye, Haiqiang Jin, Rui Zhang, Yongan Sun, Zhaoxia Wang, Weiping Sun, Wei Sun, Qing Peng, Ran Liu, Yining Huang
**Journal:** The Journal of international medical research
**Year:** 2014
**PMID:** 24287930

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVE:** To investigate the prevalence and implication of cytochrome P450, family 2, subfamily C, polypeptide 9 (CYP2C9) variants and vitamin K epoxide reductase complex, subunit 1 (VKORC1)-1639 G > A polymorphisms in Chinese patients receiving warfarin therapy.

**METHODS:** Chinese Han patients requiring oral warfarin therapy were consecutively enrolled. Correlations between CYP2C9*1, *2, *3, *4, *5 variants and VKORC1-1639 G > A polymorphisms, fourth-day international normalized ratios (INRs) and warfarin maintenance dose were investigated.

**RESULTS:** Out of 101 patients, there were no significant differences in fourth-day INR or warfarin daily maintenance doses between patients with CYP2C9*1*1 and CYP2C9*1*3 genotypes. Patients with the VKORC1-1639 AA genotype had a higher fourth-day INR (1.87 ± 0.14) than those with the VKORC1-1639 AG genotype (1.32 ± 0.15). Warfarin maintenance dose for patients with the VKORC1-1639 AA genotype (2.40 ± 0.70 mg/day) was significantly lower than for patients with the VKORC1-1639 AG genotype (4.83 ± 0.70 mg/day).

**CONCLUSIONS:** Unlike Caucasian populations, VKORC1-1639 G > A polymorphisms in the Chinese population may be the dominant genetic factors associated with warfarin response variability.
