# Methadone pharmacogenetics in vitro and in vivo: Metabolism by CYP2B6 polymorphic variants and genetic variability in paediatric disposition.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Pan-Fen Wang, Anshuman Sharma, Michael Montana, Alicia Neiner, Lindsay Juriga, Kavya Narayana Reddy, Dani Tallchief, Jane Blood, Evan D Kharasch
**Journal:** British journal of clinical pharmacology
**Year:** 2022
**PMID:** 35538637

## Abstract

**AIMS:** Methadone metabolism and clearance are determined principally by polymorphic cytochrome P4502B6 (CYP2B6). Some CYP2B6 allelic variants affect methadone metabolism in vitro and disposition in vivo. We assessed methadone metabolism by CYP2B6 minor variants in vitro. We also assessed the influence of CYP2B6 variants, and P450 oxidoreductase (POR) and CYP2C19 variants, on methadone clearance in surgical patients in vivo.

**METHODS:** CYP2B6 and P450 oxidoreductase variants were coexpressed with cytochrome b5 . The metabolism of methadone racemate and enantiomers was measured at therapeutic concentrations and intrinsic clearances were determined. Adolescents receiving methadone for surgery were genotyped for CYP2B6, CYP2C19 and POR, and methadone clearance and metabolite formation clearance were determined.

**RESULTS:** In vitro, CYP2B6.4 was more active than wild-type CYP2B6.1. CYPs 2B6.5, 2B6.6, 2B6.7, 2B6.9, 2B6.17, 2B6.19 and 2B6.26 were less active. CYPs 2B6.16 and 2B6.18 were inactive. CYP2B6.1 expressed with POR variants POR.28, POR.5 and P228L had lower rates of methadone metabolism than wild-type reductase. In vivo, methadone clinical clearance decreased linearly with the number of CYP2B6 slow metabolizer alleles, but was not different in CYP2C19 slow or rapid metabolizer phenotypes, or in carriers of the POR*28 allele.

**CONCLUSIONS:** Several CYP2B6 and POR variants were slow metabolizers of methadone in vitro. Polymorphisms in CYP2B6, but not CYP2C19 or P450 reductase, affected methadone clearance in vivo. CYP2B6 polymorphisms 516G>T and 983T>C code for canonical loss of function variants and should be assessed when considering genetic influences on clinical methadone disposition. These complementary translational in vitro and in vivo results inform on pharmacogenetic variability affecting methadone disposition in patients.
