# CYP2B6 allelic variants and non-genetic factors influence CYP2B6 enzyme function.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Katalin Mangó, Ádám Ferenc Kiss, Ferenc Fekete, Réka Erdős, Katalin Monostory
**Journal:** Scientific reports
**Year:** 2022
**PMID:** 35194103

## Abstract

Human CYP2B6 enzyme although constitutes relatively low proportion (1-4%) of hepatic cytochrome P450 content, it is the major catalyst of metabolism of several clinically important drugs (efavirenz, cyclophosphamide, bupropion, methadone). High interindividual variability in CYP2B6 function, contributing to impaired drug-response and/or adverse reactions, is partly elucidated by genetic polymorphisms, whereas non-genetic factors can significantly modify the CYP2B6 phenotype. The influence of genetic and phenoconverting non-genetic factors on CYP2B6-selective activity and CYP2B6 expression was investigated in liver tissues from Caucasian subjects (N = 119). Strong association was observed between hepatic S-mephenytoin N-demethylase activity and CYP2B6 mRNA expression (P < 0.0001). In less than one third of the tissue donors, the CYP2B6 phenotype characterized by S-mephenytoin N-demethylase activity and/or CYP2B6 expression was concordant with CYP2B6 genotype, whereas in more than 35% of the subjects, an altered CYP2B6 phenotype was attributed to phenoconverting non-genetic factors (to CYP2B6-specific inhibitors and inducers, non-specific amoxicillin + clavulanic acid treatment and chronic alcohol consumption, but not to the gender). Furthermore, CYP2B6 genotype-phenotype mismatch still existed in one third of tissue donors. In conclusion, identifying potential sources of CYP2B6 variability and considering both genetic variations and non-genetic factors is a pressing requirement for appropriate elucidation of CYP2B6 genotype-phenotype mismatch.
