# Prevalence of HLA-B*58:01 allele among Malay, Chinese and Indian ethnic patients with gout attending primary care clinics in Malaysia

## Metadata
**Authors:** Wei Leik Ng, Boon Pin Kee, Norita Hussein, Chirk Jenn Ng, Sheh Wen Kuan, Fatimah Zahrah Mohd Zaidan, Siti Umi Fairuz Azmi, Sue-Mian Then, Zhenli Kwan, Nadeem Qureshi, Jing Ran Lim, Li Ying Wong, Yew Kong Lee, Tun Firzara Abdul Malik, Rajeswari Gunasekaran, Dyoi-E Low
**Journal:** Journal of Community Genetics
**Date:** 2024 Nov 25
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12687-024-00753-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12687-024-00753-4)
**PMID:** 39586937
**PMCID:** PMC11950614
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11950614/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11950614/pdf/12687_2024_Article_753.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11950614/pdf/12687_2024_Article_753.pdf)

## Abstract

HLA-B*58:01 allele is associated with allopurinol-induced severe cutaneous reaction (SCAR). Malaysia has a multiethnic population with limited data on the prevalence of HLA-B*58:01 among patients with gout treated in primary care settings. This cross-sectional study aimed to determine the prevalence of HLA-B*5801 in patients with gout from the Malay, Chinese and Indian ethnicities attending primary clinics in Malaysia.

We collected blood samples from patients with gout attending three primary care clinics in Klang Valley, Malaysia, using convenience sampling. Genomic DNA samples were subjected to typing of HLA-B*5801 by a multiplex probe-based assay in a real-time PCR system, validated by PCR-resequencing approach.

547 patients (194 Malay, 266 Chinese and 87 Indian) were recruited. The overall prevalence of HLA-B*58:01 was 16.8% (Chinese 21.8%, Indian 12.6% and Malay 11.9%). None of our 61 HLA-B*58:01 carriers who ever used allopurinol developed SCAR.

The overall prevalence of HLA-B*58:01 allele in our patients with gout was high, particularly among the Chinese ethnicity (21.8%). None of our HLA-B*58:01 positive patients treated with allopurinol reported allopurinol-induced SCAR. A more accurate predictive model for allopurinol-induced SCAR is needed.

Keywords: Prevalence, HLA-B*58:01, Drug eruptions, Gout, Allopurinol

## Introduction

Gout is a common clinical condition encountered in the primary care setting with increasing prevalence and incidence worldwide (Mattiuzzi and Lippi [2020](#CR19)). Gout is associated with increased all-cause mortality, various co-morbidities such as obesity, diabetes mellitus and dyslipidaemia, chronic disability and reduced quality of life (Lottmann et al. [2012](#CR17)). World Health Organization has projected a 55% increase in gout mortality by 2060 (Mattiuzzi and Lippi [2020](#CR19)).

Allopurinol remains the preferred first-line urate-lowering therapy for gout, accounting for 80–90% of the prescriptions (Dehlin et al. [2020](#CR3)). While allopurinol is generally effective, it is associated with rare but potentially severe cutaneous adverse drug reactions; in particular, it is associated with severe cutaneous adverse drug reactions (SCAR) such as Stevens-Johnson Syndrome (SJS), Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis (TEN), drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) and SJS/TEN overlap (Zhao et al. [2019](#CR35)). The incidence of allopurinol-induced SCAR ranged from 1.6 to 4.68 per 1000 users in Asian countries such as Malaysia, Taiwan and Thailand while the incidence in Caucasian countries was markedly lower at 0.018 to 0.69 per 1000 users (Ng et al. [2022](#CR20); Saokaew et al. [2014](#CR25)). Although the incidence is considered low generally, allopurinol-induced SCAR is still recognized as a potentially life-threatening medical condition that is preventable; it requires prolonged hospitalization with a high mortality rate (Loo et al. [2018](#CR16)).

The association of HLA-B*5801 allele with susceptibility to allopurinol-induced SCAR was established in 2005 by Hung et al. (Hung et al. [2005](#CR10)). They identified a strong association of HLA-B*5801 allele with susceptibility to allopurinol-induced SJS, TEN and Hypersensitivity Syndrome (HSS) in ethnic Han Chinese population in Taiwan. Similar strong associations were replicated in Asian countries such as Japan, Thailand and Malaysia (Kaniwa et al. [2008](#CR12); Low et al. [2020](#CR18); Tassaneeyakul et al. [2009](#CR28)). However, these studies were not designed to provide any prevalence data, focussing on hospitalised patients with SCAR as the study population with limited sample size.

Notably, the association was much weaker in the Caucasian population (Lonjou et al. [2006](#CR14)). This suggests that ethnicity plays an important role in the genetic effect of HLA-B*58:01 allele. Malaysia is a multiethnic country where approximately 70% of its citizens are of Bumiputera ethnicity (mostly Malay), followed by the Chinese (22%) and the Indians (6.8%) (Department of Statistics [2021](#CR4)). The association between HLA-B*5801 allele and allopurinol-induced SCAR had been demonstrated in the Malay and Chinese populations while there was an inadequate sample for the Indians to make a definitive conclusion (Low et al. [2020](#CR18)).

In regard to non-genetic factors, older age, female sex, presence of renal impairment, concurrent use of high dose diuretics, and starting dose of allopurinol in relation to renal function had been associated with development of allopurinol-induced SCAR. It is postulated that the coexistence of HLA-B*58:01 with any of the non-genetic factors increased the risk of developing allopurinol-induced SCAR (Hung et al. [2005](#CR10); Lee et al. [2021](#CR13); Saksit et al. [2017](#CR24)).

There is limited data on prevalence of HLA-B*58:01 allele in the primary care setting. This study is part of a larger project with an overarching aim to explore the feasibility of implementing routine HLA-B*58:01 genetic testing before initiating allopurinol in primary care settings in Malaysia. Determining the baseline data of HLA-B*5801 allele prevalence; and understanding the clinical characteristics in patients with gout treated in primary care settings can potentially help to inform the development of a strategy on risk profiling for screening before starting allopurinol as well as carrying out risk communication in primary care clinics. This information is also critical for future pharmacoeconomic studies if HLA-B*5801 genetic testing is to be implemented in primary care settings. Hence, we aimed to determine the prevalence of the HLA-B*5801 allele and describe the clinical characteristics of the patients with gout attending the primary care clinics in Malaysia. We aimed to establish the differences among the three main ethnicities (Malay, Chinese and Indian).

## Methods

### Study design

This cross-sectional study was conducted from 1 August 2020 to 31 December 2021 in three primary care clinics in Klang Valley, an urban area in Malaysia. One clinic is based in an academic hospital, Universiti Malaya Medical Centre (UMMC) and two are public health clinics under the Ministry of Health Malaysia. UMMC is the centre of testing for HLA-B*58:01 in this study. These clinics were selected because of their proximity to UMMC and the considerably high number of patients with gout.

### Participants

Participants who fulfilled the following inclusion criteria were recruited into the study: age 18 years old and above; of either Malay, Chinese or Indian ethnicity; with a clinical diagnosis of gout made by physicians and supported by laboratory evidence of hyperuricemia (defined as serum uric acid > 420 µmol/L in males and > 360 µmol/L in females). We excluded non-Malaysians, or those with mixed ethnicity. We determined the three-generation ethnicity of the participants (themselves, their parents and grandparents) based on their self-declaration upon recruitment. If there was any doubt or suggestion of mixed ethnicity, we excluded them from the recruitment.

### Sample size

Sample size was calculated separately for each ethnicity (Malay, Chinese and Indian) based on previous data from Allele Frequency Net Database on the frequency of HLA-B*58:01 allele in the general population of Malaysia (Chinese 22.2%, Malay 11.3%, Indian 5.9%) (Gonzalez-Galarza et al. [2015](#CR8); Tan et al. [2016](#CR27); Too et al. [2019](#CR30)). We used the Open Epi sample size calculator with an estimated population size of 1,000,000 and confidence limit of 5%. Cumulatively, an estimated 506 patients were required (154 Malay, 266 Chinese and 86 Indian).

### Recruitment and sample management

Convenience sampling was used. Investigators working at the study sites identified patients who fulfilled the inclusion criteria and approached them to obtain informed written consent to participate in this study. If the patient agreed to participate, 10 ml of blood was taken from them. The researchers collected data on basic demography (age, sex and ethnicities) and clinical data such as presence of chronic kidney disease, estimated glomerular filtration rate, current medication(s), starting and current dose of allopurinol, and history of allergy to allopurinol. The blood samples were transported and stored following the standard good laboratory practice.

### Operational definition

Chronic kidney disease was defined as estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of less than 60 mL/min/1.73m^2^, persisting for at least three months. The patients’ latest eGFR were reported. Use of diuretic included frusemide, hydrochlorothiazide, indapamide and spironolactone. History of allergy to allopurinol was defined as any self-reported cutaneous reaction following initiation of allopurinol.

### HLA-B*58:01 typing and validation (Table 1)

### Table 1.

| Primer sequence (5’ -3’) |  | Reference |
| --- | --- | --- |
| β-Globin-F | AGTCAGGGCAGAGCCATCTA | Zhang et al. 2015 |
| β-Globin-R | TTAGGGTTGCCCATAACAGC | Zhang et al. 2015 |
| 5801-F | GGGCCGGAGTATTGGGATG | Zhang et al. 2015 |
| 5801-R | TGAAACCGGGTAAACGCG | Kang et al. 2016 |
| Probe sequence (fluorescence label and quencher) |  |   |
| β-Globin-probe | FAM-AGTCTGCCG/ZEN/TTACTGCCCTGTGG-IABkFQ | Zhang et al. 2015 |
| 5801-probe1 | JOE NHS-ACCGAGAGAACCTGCGGATCGCGCTCC-BHQ-2 | Zhang et al. 2015 |
| 5801-probe2 | Cy5-TCCGAGATC/TAO/CGCCTCCCTGAGGCC-IAbRQSp | Zhang et al. 2015 |
| Primer sequence (5’ -3’) |  | Reference |
| β-Globin-F | AGTCAGGGCAGAGCCATCTA | Zhang et al. 2015 |
| β-Globin-R | TTAGGGTTGCCCATAACAGC | Zhang et al. 2015 |
| 5801-F | GGGCCGGAGTATTGGGATG | Zhang et al. 2015 |
| 5801-R | TGAAACCGGGTAAACGCG | Kang et al. 2016 |
| Probe sequence (fluorescence label and quencher) |  |   |
| β-Globin-probe | FAM-AGTCTGCCG/ZEN/TTACTGCCCTGTGG-IABkFQ | Zhang et al. 2015 |
| 5801-probe1 | JOE NHS-ACCGAGAGAACCTGCGGATCGCGCTCC-BHQ-2 | Zhang et al. 2015 |
| 5801-probe2 | Cy5-TCCGAGATC/TAO/CGCCTCCCTGAGGCC-IAbRQSp | Zhang et al. 2015 |

Table 1 Caption: Sequences of the probes and primers for HLA-B*58:01 typing

Genomic DNA was extracted from blood samples via BloodZol kit (TransGen Biotech, China). Quality and quantity of the extracted genomic samples were assessed using Implen nanophotometer. Extracted genomic DNA samples were stored in a -80 °C freezer until further use, in an access-controlled laboratory. Genomic DNA samples were subjected to typing of HLA-B*58:01 according to a modified multiplex probe-based assay in a real-time PCR system (Zhang et al. [2015](#CR33); Kang et al. [2016](#CR11)). In brief, the HLA-B*5801 alleles were detected by two fluorescence-labelled probes targeting exon-2 and intron-2 of the gene. In addition, another probe targeting *β-globin* gene was included as internal control of the assay.

The typing of HLA-B*58:01 was carried out in a 10 µl multiplex reaction containing 1 × PrimeTime Gene Expression master mix (with ROX) (Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc., Singapore), 500 nM of each primer, PrimeTime probe assays (250 nM of β-Globin-probe and 5801-probe1; 750 nM of 5801-probe2) (Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc., Singapore), and 20 ng of template DNA. Amplification was performed in ABI7500 fast real-time PCR system, with the following conditions: initial holding at 50 °C for 2 min, holding at 95 °C for 3 min, and 50 cycles of denaturation at 95 °C for 30 s, annealing at 60 °C for 30 s, and extension at 72 °C for 45 s. The presence of HLA-B*5801 allele in a sample was determined by simultaneous generation of fluorescent signal of all probes in the reaction.

Typing results of the probe-based assay were validated by PCR-resequencing approach. Selected samples, with and without HLA-B*5801 allele, were amplified and sequenced to confirm the presence or absence of the allele. The exons 2 and 3 region of the *HLA-B* gene were amplified via primers (Forward: 5’-GAGCGAGGGGACCGCA-3’ and Reverse: 5’-CCGGGGTCACTCACCGG-3’) in a conventional PCR. The amplicon was purified and subjected to Sanger sequencing via the forward or reverse primers. The sequencing results were analysed and HLA alleles were determined by SOAPTyping software (Zhang et al. [2020](#CR34)).

### Data analysis

All data were analysed using IBM Statistical Package for Social Sciences version 26. Descriptive statistics were used for the prevalence data, demographic details and clinical characteristics of patients. Continuous data were checked for normality via the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. For continuous data, median and interquartile range were used for the skewed data. Categorical data were reported in proportions (percentage). Data were checked for outliers or missing data.

### Ethical consideration

To maintain confidentiality, patients’ blood samples were labelled with identifier only. Blood samples were processed according to the identifier and researchers stored patients' information separately. Tracing patient information by identifier was done only when necessary and during study analysis. The blood samples were kept securely in the researchers’ laboratory with limited access. The study data were kept in a password-protected computer accessible only by the researchers.

## Results

There were 547 patients (194 Malay, 266 Chinese and 87 Indian) recruited (Table [2](#Tab2)). Most of our patients aged 60 years or older (n = 353, 64.5%) with a median age of 64 years old (interquartile range, IQR = 18). The majority were male (n = 448, 81.9%). Out of the 547 patients with gout, 61.6% (n = 337), 8.8% (n = 48) and 29.6% (n = 162) were currently taking allopurinol, previously treated with allopurinol, and had never taken allopurinol, respectively (Table [2](#Tab2)). Those who were previous allopurinol users were not on any other form of urate-lowering therapy such as febuxostat or probenecid. The median starting and current daily dose of allopurinol were 100 mg (IQR 50) and 150 mg (IQR = 100) respectively. Majority of the patients (87.4%) were not on any diuretics.

### Table 2.

| Variables | Categories | Frequency, n (%) | Median (IQR) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Age (years) | < 60 | 194 (35.5) | 64 (18) |
|   | ≥ 60 | 353 (64.5) |   |
| Sex | Male | 448 (81.9) |   |
| Female | 99 (18.1) |   |  |
| Ethnicity | Chinese | 266 (48.6) |   |
|   | Malay | 194 (35.5) |   |
|   | Indian | 87 (15.9) |   |
| On allopurinol | Current use | 337 (61.6) |   |
|   | Never | 162 (29.6) |   |
|   | Previous use | 48 (8.8) |   |
| Daily starting allopurinol dosage (mg)a |   |   | 100 (50) |
| Daily current allopurinol dosage (mg) |   |   | 150 (100) |
| History of allergy to allopurinol (n = 385) | Yes | 22 (5.7) |   |
| No | 363 (94.3) |   |  |
| Presence of CKD | Yes | 185 (33.8) |   |
|   | No | 361 (66.0) |   |
|   | Unknown | 1 (0.2) |   |
| eGFR (mL/min/1.73m2) |   |   | 71 (36) |
| Concurrent use of diuretic | Yes | 69 (12.6) |   |
|   | No | 478 (87.4) |   |

Table 2 Caption: Characteristics of patients (N = 547)

Table [2](#Tab2) demonstrates approximately 5.7% of the patients who were currently or previously taking allopurinol reported allergic reactions towards allopurinol. The self-reported allergic reactions were mild to moderate in severity, ranging from rashes, itch, generalized urticaria, pustules, blisters, eyelid swelling, angioedema, penile ulcers and oral ulcers. None of the 547 patients in this study had a history of SCAR.

Table [3](#Tab3) shows the results on the prevalence of HLA-B*58:01 allele in this study as well findings from other studies for comparison. The overall prevalence of HLA-B*58:01 allele in this study was 16.8% (n = 92) (Table [3](#Tab3)). Based on ethnicity, the highest proportion of patients with HLA-B*58:01 allele at 21.8% (n = 58) were among the Chinese, followed by Indians (n = 11, 12.6%) and Malays (n = 23, 11.9%).

### Table 3.

| Ethnicity | Sample size | Presence of HLA-B*58:01 allele |  | Prevalence in Malaysian general healthy population (previous study) |  | Prevalence data of similar ethnicities from other countriesb |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| n (%) | 95% CI | % | 95% CI | % | Countries |  |  |
| Chinese | 266 | 58 (21.8) | 17.0 – 27.3 | 22.2 | 16.5 – 28.7 | 12.3 – 21.8 | China, Hong Kong SAR, Taiwan, Singapore |
| Indian | 87 | 11 (12.6) | 6.5 – 21.5 | 5.9 | 3.4 – 9.4 | 3.5 – 15.4 | India, Singapore |
| Malay | 194 | 23 (11.9) | 7.6 – 17.3 | 11.3 | 9.3 – 13.4 | 7.3 – 11.4 | Indonesia, Singapore |
| Total | 547 | 92 (16.8) | 13.8 – 20.2 |   |  |   |  |

Table 3 Caption: Proportion of patients with HLA-B*58:01 allele according to ethnicity

Out of the 92 HLA-B*58:01 carriers in our sample, 61 patients were current or previous allopurinol users (52 current users; 9 previous users). The proportion of HLA-B*58:01 carrier among all allopurinol users was 15.8% (n = 61). None of them had a history of allopurinol-induced SCAR. Only three of the 22 patients (13.6%) who reported mild-to-moderate allergic reactions to allopurinol carried the HLA-B*58:01 allele. There was no significant association between the mild-to-moderate allergic reactions to allopurinol with the presence of HLA-B*58:01 allele (Chi-square test, p = 0.617).

## Discussion

The key findings from our study were: (a) the overall prevalence of HLA-B*58:01 allele in our Malaysian population was high at 16.8%, especially among the Chinese patients at 21.8%, followed by Indian (12.6%) and Malay (11.9%); (b) no history of allopurinol-induced SCAR reported among the 61 (15.8%) HLA-B*5801 carriers who were ever treated with allopurinol.

The prevalence of HLA-B*58:01 allele in our study (16.8%) is about similar to the Singapore population which was 18.5% (Dong et al. [2015](#CR5)). It is higher than what is reported for other countries such as Korea (5.7%), Japan (1.2%) and Europe (1.5%) (Kaniwa et al. [2008](#CR12); Park et al. [2015](#CR22)). Our data for the Chinese and Malay patients are also consistent with the reported prevalence from previous studies on general healthy population where the prevalence of HLA-B*5801 allele among the Chinese and Malay were reported as 22.2% and 11.3% respectively (Gonzalez-Galarza et al. [2015](#CR8); Tan et al. [2016](#CR27); Too et al. [2019](#CR30)). The high prevalence among the Chinese was expected and our data is consistent with overseas study on Chinese ethnicity where the prevalence was as high as 21.8% (Table [3](#Tab3)) (Dean and Kane [2012](#CR2); Dong et al. [2015](#CR5); Gonzalez-Galarza et al. [2015](#CR8)). Allopurinol-induced cutaneous adverse reactions are common in countries with significant Chinese populations such as China, Taiwan and Singapore (Dong et al. [2015](#CR5); Huang et al. [2021](#CR9); Zhao et al. [2019](#CR35)). In Malaysia, we also found that the percentage of allopurinol-induced SCAR according to ethnicity was highest among the Chinese compared to the Malay and Indian (Ng et al. [2022](#CR20)). Chinese had the highest percentage of allopurinol-induced SCAR per ethnicities at 3.18 × 10^–4^%, followed by Malay (1.69 × 10^–4^%) and Indian (0.80 × 10^–4^%) (Ng et al. [2022](#CR20)).

We had initially postulated that the prevalence of HLA-B*58:01 allele would be much higher in the Malay ethnicity compared to the Indian. This postulation is based on the two reported evidence. First, the previously reported prevalence of HLA-B*58:01 allele in our general population was 11.3% for Malay versus 5.9% for Indian (Gonzalez-Galarza et al. [2015](#CR8); Tan et al. [2016](#CR27)). In Singapore, the prevalence of HLA-B*5801 carriers was 7.3% and 3.5% among Singaporean Malays and Indians respectively (Dong et al. [2015](#CR5)). Secondly, based on our national pharmacovigilance database from 2000 to 2018, the number of allopurinol-induced SCAR according to ethnicity only revealed 14 cases for Indian versus 320 for Malay (Lee et al. [2021](#CR13)). Considering the significance of HLA-B*58:01 as the risk factor for allopurinol-induced SCAR, it is reasonable to estimate the prevalence of HLA-B*58:01 allele would be higher in the Malay patients than the Indian patients based on the pharmacovigilance data. In contrast, our data revealed an almost similar prevalence of HLA-B*58:01 allele for both Indian and Malay (12.6% versus 11.9%). The use of non-random convenience sampling and a relatively smaller sample size for the Indian patients in our study may have contributed to the unexpectedly higher prevalence of HLA-B*58:01 allele in the Indian patients. Although there is a lack of evidence associating HLA-B*58:01 with allopurinol-induced SCAR among Indians in Malaysia, Low et al ([2020](#CR18)) noted that two out of three Indian patients with allopurinol-induced SCAR in their study tested positive for HLA-B*58:01 (Low et al. [2020](#CR18)). However, given the discordant findings in our study for the Indian ethnicity, low number of SCAR cases in our national pharmacovigilance database and the scarcity of evidence of association of HLA-B*58:01 with allopurinol-induced SCAR in our Indian population, it may be premature to recommend HLA-B*58:01 screening actively for the Indian patients in Malaysia.

The discussion on prevalence of HLA-B*58:01 allele based on ethnicity is relevant as we know that there is a marked difference in the strength of association of HLA-B*5801 allele with susceptibility to allopurinol-induced SCAR between the Asian and Caucasian populations, in which the association was much weaker in Caucasian population (Lonjou et al. [2008](#CR15); Lonjou et al. [2006](#CR14)). This suggests that HLA loci involvement in SCAR may be ethnic-specific. In 2020, American College of Rheumatology had recommended HLA-B*58:01 testing for selected populations with higher HLA-B*5801 allele frequency such as those of Southeast Asian descent (e.g., Han Chinese, Korean, Thai) and African American patients before starting allopurinol (FitzGerald et al. [2020](#CR7)). However, Southeast Asia comprises many diverse ethnic groups with a likely high rate of genetic intermingling. Hence, there is a need to research each ethnicity group separately to refine the recommendation of HLA-B*5801 screening for the Southeast Asia population.

The association between HLA-B*58:01 and allopurinol-induced SCAR has been well-established from previous studies, where the odds ratios were as high as 49–96 (Low et al. [2020](#CR18); Somkrua et al. [2011](#CR26)). However, none of our 61 HLA-B*58:01 carriers in this study who were ever treated with allopurinol developed allopurinol-induced SCAR. They constituted 15.8% of our 385 current or previous allopurinol users in our cohort. This proportion is similar to findings from other studies in Malaysia, Thailand and Taiwan where the proportion of HLA-B*58:01 carriers in allopurinol-tolerant group ranged from 12.96% to 15% (Hung et al. [2005](#CR10); Low et al. [2020](#CR18); Tassaneeyakul et al. [2009](#CR28)). This could be due to the low positive predictive value of HLA-B*58:01. Previous studies had estimated the positive predictive value of HLA-B*58:01 testing to as low as 3% due to the low prevalence of allopurinol-induced SCAR, while the negative predictive value was high (96–100%) (Yu [2017](#CR32)). Using data from the published incidence of allopurinol-induced SCAR in Malaysia and pooled sensitivity and specificity data from a systematic review, we calculated the positive predictive value of HLA-B*58:01 testing in Malaysia to be less than 1% and negative predictive value of 99% (Ng et al. [2022](#CR20); Yu et al. [2017](#CR32)). This is consistent with the reported literature. This emphasizes the significance of other concomitant risk factors such as renal insufficiency, female sex, higher starting dose of allopurinol in relation to renal function, concomitant diuretic use and age 60 years or older (Hung et al. [2005](#CR10); Park et al. [2016](#CR23); Somkrua et al. [2011](#CR26); Yang et al. [2015](#CR31)). It is possible that the combination of these non-genetic risk factors, rather than one single risk factor, would be more likely to cause allopurinol-induced SCAR (Low et al. [2020](#CR18)). Presence of renal impairment, particularly those with eGFR less than 30 mL/min/1.73m^2^, had been shown to increase the positive predictive value of HLA-B*58:01 testing (Ng et al. [2016](#CR21)). In Malaysia, similar risk factors for allopurinol-induced SCAR were noted, namely underlying renal disease, higher initiation dose of 300 mg/day, females aged 65 years and above (Lee et al. [2021](#CR13)). The lack of concomitant risk factors could explain the absence of SCAR in our study population. Our cohort of HLA-B*58:01 allele carriers were predominantly male with median age of 64 years old, lower daily starting and current allopurinol dose, relatively higher eGFR of 70 mL/min/1.73m^2^ and less use of diuretics (Table [2](#Tab2)). It is probably useful to screen for HLA-B*58:01 in patients with multiple concomitant risk factors, especially among the Malay and Chinese patients. Our interquartile ranges for starting and current allopurinol dose are quite large at 50 mg and 100 mg respectively, but the ranges remain lower than the high dose of 300 mg typically associated with SCAR. Other possible explanations of the absence of SCAR in our study population are the patients who had SCAR were lost to follow-up, or were followed up in speciality clinic such as rheumatology clinic after the SCAR episode, as they may require second-line medications such as febuxostat which are only available in specialty clinic in our country.

In this study, we also investigated the possible link between non-severe allopurinol-induced cutaneous reaction and presence of HLA-B*58:01 allele. Allopurinol-induced cutaneous adverse reactions are common and local data showed that SCAR only accounted for one-third of all reported cases of allopurinol-induced cutaneous adverse reaction (Ng et al. [2022](#CR20)). However, we only detected HLA-B*58:01 alleles in 3 (13.6%) out of 22 patients who reported mild to moderate allergic reaction to allopurinol (non-SCAR) with no significant association between HLA-B*58:01 and mild to moderate allergy. This is in contrast to those with allopurinol-induced SCAR where the proportion of HLA-B*58:01 carriers in those with allopurinol-induced SCAR were as high as 89–100% (Hung et al. [2005](#CR10); Low et al. [2020](#CR18); Park et al. [2016](#CR23); Tassaneeyakul et al. [2009](#CR28)). Data is scarce on the proportion and role of HLA-B*58:01 in developing mild to moderate allergic reaction to allopurinol. We must interpret this with caution as our data were obtained from patients self-reporting.

In Malaysia and many parts of Southeast Asia, currently, HLA-B*58:01 screening is not routinely performed before the initiation of allopurinol. Some medical centres in Taiwan, Hong Kong, Thailand and mainland China provide such screening. Preventive test of HLA-B*58:01 for allopurinol are supported by national health insurance in Korea and China. The test is available in certain centres such as UMMC, Institute for Medical Research (IMR) and some private laboratories in Malaysia. The availability of the test on a mass scale and cost-effectiveness are some of the factors that influence the screening uptake for HLA-B*58:01. Cost-effectiveness evaluation of HLA-B*58:01 screening is country-specific and depends on factors such as prevalence of HLA-B*58:01 carriers, cost of genetic testing, availability and cost of allopurinol alternatives, rate of allopurinol-tolerant users and allopurinol-induced SCAR. Screening for HLA-B*58:01 was effective in the Thai and Korean populations with renal impairment (Park et al. [2015](#CR22); Saokaew et al. [2014](#CR25)). However, the study by Park et al ([2015](#CR22)) used a time horizon of only 12 months, which does not adequately represent the chronic nature of gout. HLA-B*58:01 screening was not cost-effective in Malaysia, Singapore and Vietnam (Chong et al. [2018](#CR1); Dong et al. [2015](#CR5); Duong et al. [2023](#CR6)). Teng et al. ([2020](#CR29)) further demonstrated that a more targeted HLA-B*58:01 testing in gout patients with chronic kidney disease in Singapore was not cost-effective (Teng et al. [2020](#CR29)). There was suggestion that targeting specific subgroups of patients with increased risk of SCAR may be cost-effective (Teng et al. [2020](#CR29)). Predictive models, such as combining HLA-B*58:01 testing with non-genetic risk factors, could potentially predict allopurinol-induced SCAR more accurately, thus improving its cost-effectiveness.

In current practice, there is insufficient evidence to recommend routine HLA-B*58:01 testing for every patient with gout prior to starting allopurinol. The decision to test for HLA-B*58:01 should be individualised, taking into account the patient’s risk profile, personal preferences and willingness to self-fund the cost of testing. This requires risk communication discussion with patients to reach a shared decision.

## Strength and limitation

Our study sample included a diverse group from three settings with good representation of different main ethnicities in Malaysia, namely Malay, Chinese and Indian. We targeted patients with gout in the primary care settings, who are the principal users of allopurinol. Our prevalence data was generally consistent with the previous reported findings for the Malay and Chinese population, lending strength to the accuracy of our data.

We used convenience sampling in this study due to feasibility consideration; this may have influenced our prevalence data for the Indian population. Hence, our findings may not be generalizable to the Malaysian population.

## Conclusion

Our study revealed high prevalence of HLA-B*58:01 allele among the Chinese, Indian and Malay patients with gout, similar to other studies. None of our HLA-B*58:01 positive patients with gout treated with allopurinol ever reported allopurinol-induced SCAR, consistent with the low positive predictive values of HLA-B*58:01 reported by other studies. Development of predictive models for HLA-B*58:01 are needed to better predict allopurinol-induced SCAR.

## Acknowledgements

We thank the Director General of Health Malaysia for his permission to publish this article. We also appreciate the assistance of the following people in helping us with the sample collection: Madam Noor Asyikkin binti Omar and Madam Rozlaily binti Badrulzaman from Ministry of Health Malaysia, staff in UMMC blood-taking centre and primary care clinic, Dr. Ng Ting Guan and staff of dermatology unit, Hospital Tengku Ampuan Rahimah, and staff of dermatology unit, Hospital Serdang.

## Author contributions

W.L.N., N.H., C.J.N., N.Q., B.P.K., S.M.T., Z.K., Y.K.L. and T.F.A.M. participated in the study conceptualization and design. W.L.N., N.H., C.J.N., N.Q., B.P.K., S.W.K.,S.M.T., Z.K., Y.K.L. and T.F.A.M. contributed to the development of the research proposal, literature review, grant acquisition and execution of the research. Material preparation, data collection and analysis were performed by W.L.N., B.P.K., S.W.K., J.R.L., L.Y.W., F.Z.M.Z., S.U.F.A., R.G. and D.L. The first draft of the manuscript was written by W.L.N. and B.P.K. and all authors commented on previous versions of the manuscript. All authors reviewed and approved the final manuscript.

## Funding

The authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research: This work was supported by the University of Malaya Specialist Centre (UMSC) CA.R.E Fund Research Grant 2020 (grant number: PV016-2020).

## Data availability

Access to data can be requested from the authors.

## Declarations

### Conflict of interest

One of our authors, Professor Nadeem Qureshi serves on the advisory board for Journal of Community Genetics. The rest of the authors have no competing interest.

### Compliance with ethics guidelines

All procedures followed were in accordance with the ethical standards of the responsible committee on human experimentation (institutional and national) and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2000. Informed consent was obtained from all patients for being included in the study.

This study was approved by the UMMC Ethics Committee (MREC ID NO: 2020224–8313) and the Medical Research and Ethics Committee, Ministry of Health Malaysia (NMRR-20–1612-53782).

## Footnotes

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Data Availability Statement

Access to data can be requested from the authors.

### Data Availability Statement

Access to data can be requested from the authors.

## References

1. Chong HY, Lim YH, Prawjaeng J, Tassaneeyakul W, Mohamed Z, Chaiyakunapruk N (2018) Cost-effectiveness analysis of HLA-B*58: 01 genetic testing before initiation of allopurinol therapy to prevent allopurinol-induced Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis in a Malaysian population. Pharmacogenet Genomics 28:56–67  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0000000000000319) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29176400/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Chong%20HY,%20Lim%20YH,%20Prawjaeng%20J,%20Tassaneeyakul%20W,%20Mohamed%20Z,%20Chaiyakunapruk%20N%20(2018)%20Cost-effectiveness%20analysis%20of%20HLA-B*58:%2001%20genetic%20testing%20before%20initiation%20of%20allopurinol%20therapy%20to%20prevent%20allopurinol-induced%20Stevens-Johnson%20syndrome/toxic%20epidermal%20necrolysis%20in%20a%20Malaysian%20population.%20Pharmacogenet%20Genomics%2028:56%E2%80%9367)

2. Dean L, Kane M (2013) Allopurinol Therapy and HLA-B*58:01 Genotype. In: Pratt VM, et al. (eds) Medical Genetics Summaries. National Center for Biotechnology Information (US)  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28520356/)

3. Dehlin M, Jacobsson L, Roddy E (2020) Global epidemiology of gout: prevalence, incidence, treatment patterns and risk factors. Nat Rev Rheumatol 16:380–390  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41584-020-0441-1) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32541923/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Dehlin%20M,%20Jacobsson%20L,%20Roddy%20E%20(2020)%20Global%20epidemiology%20of%20gout:%20prevalence,%20incidence,%20treatment%20patterns%20and%20risk%20factors.%20Nat%20Rev%20Rheumatol%2016:380%E2%80%93390)

4. Department of Statistics, Malaysia (2021) Current population estimates, Malaysia. https://www.dosm.gov.my/v1/index.php?r=home/index&menu_id=OWNEc3U1QXJCQ1BuZVg0ZjcxTzlmUT09. Accessed 22 Jan 2023  [https://www.dosm.gov.my/v1/index.php?r=home/index&menu_id=OWNEc3U1QXJCQ1BuZVg0ZjcxTzlmUT09](https://www.dosm.gov.my/v1/index.php?r=home/index&menu_id=OWNEc3U1QXJCQ1BuZVg0ZjcxTzlmUT09)

5. Dong D, Tan-Koi WC, Teng GG, Finkelstein E, Sung C (2015) Cost-effectiveness analysis of genotyping for HLA-B*5801 and an enhanced safety program in gout patients starting allopurinol in Singapore. Pharmacogenomics 16:1781–1793  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2217/pgs.15.125) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26554739/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Dong%20D,%20Tan-Koi%20WC,%20Teng%20GG,%20Finkelstein%20E,%20Sung%20C%20(2015)%20Cost-effectiveness%20analysis%20of%20genotyping%20for%20HLA-B*5801%20and%20an%20enhanced%20safety%20program%20in%20gout%20patients%20starting%20allopurinol%20in%20Singapore.%20Pharmacogenomics%2016:1781%E2%80%931793)

6. Duong KN, Nguyen DV, Chaiyakunapruk N, Nelson RE, Malone DC (2023) Cost-effectiveness of HLA-B*58:01 testing to prevent Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis in Vietnam. Pharmacogenomics 24(13):713–724. 10.2217/pgs-2023-0095  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2217/pgs-2023-0095) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC11828023/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37706247/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Duong%20KN,%20Nguyen%20DV,%20Chaiyakunapruk%20N,%20Nelson%20RE,%20Malone%20DC%20(2023)%20Cost-effectiveness%20of%20HLA-B*58:01%20testing%20to%20prevent%20Stevens-Johnson%20syndrome/toxic%20epidermal%20necrolysis%20in%20Vietnam.%20Pharmacogenomics%2024(13):713%E2%80%93724.%2010.2217/pgs-2023-0095)

7. FitzGerald JD, Dalbeth N, Mikuls T, Brignardello-Petersen R, Guyatt G, Abeles AM, Gelber AC, Harrold LR, Khanna D, King C, Levy G, Libbey C, Mount D, Pillinger MH, Rosenthal A, Singh JA, Sims JE, Smith BJ, Wenger NS, Bae SS, Danve A, Khanna PP, Kim SC, Lenert A, Poon S, Qasim A, Sehra ST, Sharma TSK, Toprover M, Turgunbaev M, Zeng L, Zhang MA, Turner AS, Neogi T (2020) 2020 American college of rheumatology guideline for the management of gout. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 72:744–760  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/acr.24180) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC10563586/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32391934/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?FitzGerald%20JD,%20Dalbeth%20N,%20Mikuls%20T,%20Brignardello-Petersen%20R,%20Guyatt%20G,%20Abeles%20AM,%20Gelber%20AC,%20Harrold%20LR,%20Khanna%20D,%20King%20C,%20Levy%20G,%20Libbey%20C,%20Mount%20D,%20Pillinger%20MH,%20Rosenthal%20A,%20Singh%20JA,%20Sims%20JE,%20Smith%20BJ,%20Wenger%20NS,%20Bae%20SS,%20Danve%20A,%20Khanna%20PP,%20Kim%20SC,%20Lenert%20A,%20Poon%20S,%20Qasim%20A,%20Sehra%20ST,%20Sharma%20TSK,%20Toprover%20M,%20Turgunbaev%20M,%20Zeng%20L,%20Zhang%20MA,%20Turner%20AS,%20Neogi%20T%20(2020)%202020%20American%20college%20of%20rheumatology%20guideline%20for%20the%20management%20of%20gout.%20Arthritis%20Care%20Res%20(Hoboken)%2072:744%E2%80%93760)

8. González-Galarza FF, Takeshita LY, Santos EJ, Kempson F, Maia MH, Silva AL, Silva AL, Ghattaoraya GS, Alfirevic A, Jones AR, Middleton D (2015) Allele frequency net 2015 update: new features for HLA epitopes, KIR and disease and HLA adverse drug reaction associations. Nucleic Acids Res 43:D784-8  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gku1166) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4383964/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25414323/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Gonz%C3%A1lez-Galarza%20FF,%20Takeshita%20LY,%20Santos%20EJ,%20Kempson%20F,%20Maia%20MH,%20Silva%20AL,%20Silva%20AL,%20Ghattaoraya%20GS,%20Alfirevic%20A,%20Jones%20AR,%20Middleton%20D%20(2015)%20Allele%20frequency%20net%202015%20update:%20new%20features%20for%20HLA%20epitopes,%20KIR%20and%20disease%20and%20HLA%20adverse%20drug%20reaction%20associations.%20Nucleic%20Acids%20Res%2043:D784-8)

9. Huang PW, Chiou MH, Chien MY, Chen WW, Chu CY (2022) Analysis of severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCARs) in Taiwan drug-injury relief system: 18-year results. J Formos Med Assoc 121(8):1397–1405  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfma.2021.09.025) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34674904/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Huang%20PW,%20Chiou%20MH,%20Chien%20MY,%20Chen%20WW,%20Chu%20CY%20(2022)%20Analysis%20of%20severe%20cutaneous%20adverse%20reactions%20(SCARs)%20in%20Taiwan%20drug-injury%20relief%20system:%2018-year%20results.%20J%20Formos%20Med%20Assoc%20121(8):1397%E2%80%931405)

10. Hung SI, Chung WH, Liou LB, Chu CC, Lin M, Huang HP, Lin YL, Lan JL, Yang LC, Hong HS, Chen MJ, Lai PC, Wu MS, Chu CY, Wang KH, Chen CH, Fann CS, Wu JY, Chen YT (2005) HLA-B*5801 allele as a genetic marker for severe cutaneous adverse reactions caused by allopurinol. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102:4134–4139  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0409500102) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC554812/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15743917/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Hung%20SI,%20Chung%20WH,%20Liou%20LB,%20Chu%20CC,%20Lin%20M,%20Huang%20HP,%20Lin%20YL,%20Lan%20JL,%20Yang%20LC,%20Hong%20HS,%20Chen%20MJ,%20Lai%20PC,%20Wu%20MS,%20Chu%20CY,%20Wang%20KH,%20Chen%20CH,%20Fann%20CS,%20Wu%20JY,%20Chen%20YT%20(2005)%20HLA-B*5801%20allele%20as%20a%20genetic%20marker%20for%20severe%20cutaneous%20adverse%20reactions%20caused%20by%20allopurinol.%20Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20U%20S%20A%20102:4134%E2%80%934139)

11. Kang X, Chen R, Han M, Liu Z, Liu J, Dai P, Chen C, Wang H (2016) Rapid and reliable genotyping of HLA-B*58:01 in four Chinese populations using a single-tube duplex real-time PCR assay. Pharmacogenomics 17:47–57  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2217/pgs.15.160) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26652271/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Kang%20X,%20Chen%20R,%20Han%20M,%20Liu%20Z,%20Liu%20J,%20Dai%20P,%20Chen%20C,%20Wang%20H%20(2016)%20Rapid%20and%20reliable%20genotyping%20of%20HLA-B*58:01%20in%20four%20Chinese%20populations%20using%20a%20single-tube%20duplex%20real-time%20PCR%20assay.%20Pharmacogenomics%2017:47%E2%80%9357)

12. Kaniwa N, Saito Y, Aihara M, Matsunaga K, Tohkin M, Kurose K, Sawada J, Furuya H, Takahashi Y, Muramatsu M, Kinoshita S, Abe M, Ikeda H, Kashiwagi M, Song Y, Ueta M, Sotozono C, Ikezawa Z, Hasegawa R, Jsar research group (2008) HLA-B locus in Japanese patients with anti-epileptics and allopurinol-related Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis. Pharmacogenomics 9:1617–22  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2217/14622416.9.11.1617) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19018717/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Kaniwa%20N,%20Saito%20Y,%20Aihara%20M,%20Matsunaga%20K,%20Tohkin%20M,%20Kurose%20K,%20Sawada%20J,%20Furuya%20H,%20Takahashi%20Y,%20Muramatsu%20M,%20Kinoshita%20S,%20Abe%20M,%20Ikeda%20H,%20Kashiwagi%20M,%20Song%20Y,%20Ueta%20M,%20Sotozono%20C,%20Ikezawa%20Z,%20Hasegawa%20R,%20Jsar%20research%20group%20(2008)%20HLA-B%20locus%20in%20Japanese%20patients%20with%20anti-epileptics%20and%20allopurinol-related%20Stevens-Johnson%20syndrome%20and%20toxic%20epidermal%20necrolysis.%20Pharmacogenomics%209:1617%E2%80%9322)

13. Lee SC, Wo WK, Yeoh HS, Mohamed Ali N, Hariraj V (2021) Allopurinol-induced severe cutaneous adverse drug reactions: an analysis of spontaneous reports in Malaysia (2000–2018). Ther Innov Regul Sci 55:514–522  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s43441-020-00245-w) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33393015/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Lee%20SC,%20Wo%20WK,%20Yeoh%20HS,%20Mohamed%20Ali%20N,%20Hariraj%20V%20(2021)%20Allopurinol-induced%20severe%20cutaneous%20adverse%20drug%20reactions:%20an%20analysis%20of%20spontaneous%20reports%20in%20Malaysia%20(2000%E2%80%932018).%20Ther%20Innov%20Regul%20Sci%2055:514%E2%80%93522)

14. Lonjou C, Thomas L, Borot N, Ledger N, de Toma C, LeLouet H, Graf E, Schumacher M, Hovnanian A, Mockenhaupt M, Roujeau JC, Scar Group Regi (2006) A marker for Stevens-Johnson syndrome ...: ethnicity matters. Pharmacogenomics J 6:265–8  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.tpj.6500356) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16415921/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Lonjou%20C,%20Thomas%20L,%20Borot%20N,%20Ledger%20N,%20de%20Toma%20C,%20LeLouet%20H,%20Graf%20E,%20Schumacher%20M,%20Hovnanian%20A,%20Mockenhaupt%20M,%20Roujeau%20JC,%20Scar%20Group%20Regi%20(2006)%20A%20marker%20for%20Stevens-Johnson%20syndrome%20...:%20ethnicity%20matters.%20Pharmacogenomics%20J%206:265%E2%80%938)

15. Lonjou C, Borot N, Sekula P, Ledger N, Thomas L, Halevy S, Naldi L, Bouwes-Bavinck JN, Sidoroff A, de Toma C, Schumacher M, Roujeau JC, Hovnanian A, Mockenhaupt M, Scar study group Regi (2008) A European study of HLA-B in Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis related to five high-risk drugs. Pharmacogenet Genom 18:99–107  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0b013e3282f3ef9c) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18192896/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Lonjou%20C,%20Borot%20N,%20Sekula%20P,%20Ledger%20N,%20Thomas%20L,%20Halevy%20S,%20Naldi%20L,%20Bouwes-Bavinck%20JN,%20Sidoroff%20A,%20de%20Toma%20C,%20Schumacher%20M,%20Roujeau%20JC,%20Hovnanian%20A,%20Mockenhaupt%20M,%20Scar%20study%20group%20Regi%20(2008)%20A%20European%20study%20of%20HLA-B%20in%20Stevens-Johnson%20syndrome%20and%20toxic%20epidermal%20necrolysis%20related%20to%20five%20high-risk%20drugs.%20Pharmacogenet%20Genom%2018:99%E2%80%93107)

16. Loo CH, Tan WC, Khor YH, Chan LC (2018) A 10-years retrospective study on severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCARs) in a tertiary hospital in Penang, Malaysia. Med J Malaysia 73:73–77  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29703869/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Loo%20CH,%20Tan%20WC,%20Khor%20YH,%20Chan%20LC%20(2018)%20A%2010-years%20retrospective%20study%20on%20severe%20cutaneous%20adverse%20reactions%20(SCARs)%20in%20a%20tertiary%20hospital%20in%20Penang,%20Malaysia.%20Med%20J%20Malaysia%2073:73%E2%80%9377)

17. Lottmann K, Chen X, Schadlich PK (2012) Association between gout and all-cause as well as cardiovascular mortality: a systematic review. Curr Rheumatol Rep 14:195–203  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11926-011-0234-2) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3297741/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22350606/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Lottmann%20K,%20Chen%20X,%20Schadlich%20PK%20(2012)%20Association%20between%20gout%20and%20all-cause%20as%20well%20as%20cardiovascular%20mortality:%20a%20systematic%20review.%20Curr%20Rheumatol%20Rep%2014:195%E2%80%93203)

18. Low DE, Nurul-Aain AF, Tan WC, Tang JJ, Bakhtiar MF, Murad S, Chang CC, Too CL, Tang MM (2020) HLA-B*58: 01 association in allopurinol-induced severe cutaneous adverse reactions: the implication of ethnicity and clinical phenotypes in multiethnic Malaysia. Pharmacogenet Genom 30:153–160  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0000000000000408) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32433341/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Low%20DE,%20Nurul-Aain%20AF,%20Tan%20WC,%20Tang%20JJ,%20Bakhtiar%20MF,%20Murad%20S,%20Chang%20CC,%20Too%20CL,%20Tang%20MM%20(2020)%20HLA-B*58:%2001%20association%20in%20allopurinol-induced%20severe%20cutaneous%20adverse%20reactions:%20the%20implication%20of%20ethnicity%20and%20clinical%20phenotypes%20in%20multiethnic%20Malaysia.%20Pharmacogenet%20Genom%2030:153%E2%80%93160)

19. Mattiuzzi C, Lippi G (2020) Recent updates on worldwide gout epidemiology. Clin Rheumatol 39:1061–1063  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10067-019-04868-9) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31836936/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Mattiuzzi%20C,%20Lippi%20G%20(2020)%20Recent%20updates%20on%20worldwide%20gout%20epidemiology.%20Clin%20Rheumatol%2039:1061%E2%80%931063)

20. Ng WL, Lim KS, Hariraj V, Lee SC, Wo WK, Ramli A, Lai PSM, Fong SL, Lim JR (2022) Incidence of allopurinol-induced severe cutaneous adverse drug reaction in Malaysia. Br J Clin Pharmacol 88(8):3782–3788  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/bcp.15327) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35318720/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Ng%20WL,%20Lim%20KS,%20Hariraj%20V,%20Lee%20SC,%20Wo%20WK,%20Ramli%20A,%20Lai%20PSM,%20Fong%20SL,%20Lim%20JR%20(2022)%20Incidence%20of%20allopurinol-induced%20severe%20cutaneous%20adverse%20drug%20reaction%20in%20Malaysia.%20Br%20J%20Clin%20Pharmacol%2088(8):3782%E2%80%933788)

21. Ng CY, Yeh YT, Wang CW, Hung SI, Yang CH, Chang YC, Chang WC, Lin YJ, Chang CJ, Su SC, Fan WL, Chen DY, Wu YJ, Tian YC, Hui RC, Chung WH, Taiwan Severe Cutaneous Adverse Reaction Consortium (2016) Impact of the HLA-B(*)58:01 allele and renal impairment on allopurinol-induced cutaneous adverse reactions. J Invest Dermatol 136(7):1373–1381. 10.1016/j.jid.2016.02.808  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jid.2016.02.808) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26996548/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Ng%20CY,%20Yeh%20YT,%20Wang%20CW,%20Hung%20SI,%20Yang%20CH,%20Chang%20YC,%20Chang%20WC,%20Lin%20YJ,%20Chang%20CJ,%20Su%20SC,%20Fan%20WL,%20Chen%20DY,%20Wu%20YJ,%20Tian%20YC,%20Hui%20RC,%20Chung%20WH,%20Taiwan%20Severe%20Cutaneous%20Adverse%20Reaction%20Consortium%20(2016)%20Impact%20of%20the%20HLA-B(*)58:01%20allele%20and%20renal%20impairment%20on%20allopurinol-induced%20cutaneous%20adverse%20reactions.%20J%20Invest%20Dermatol%20136(7):1373%E2%80%931381.%2010.1016/j.jid.2016.02.808)

22. Park DJ, Kang JH, Lee JW, Lee KE, Wen L, Kim TJ, Park YW, Park SH, Lee SS (2015) Cost-effectiveness analysis of HLA-B5801 genotyping in the treatment of gout patients with chronic renal insufficiency in Korea. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 67:280–287  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/acr.22409) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25047754/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Park%20DJ,%20Kang%20JH,%20Lee%20JW,%20Lee%20KE,%20Wen%20L,%20Kim%20TJ,%20Park%20YW,%20Park%20SH,%20Lee%20SS%20(2015)%20Cost-effectiveness%20analysis%20of%20HLA-B5801%20genotyping%20in%20the%20treatment%20of%20gout%20patients%20with%20chronic%20renal%20insufficiency%20in%20Korea.%20Arthritis%20Care%20Res%20(Hoboken)%2067:280%E2%80%93287)

23. Park HJ, Kim YJ, Kim DH, Kim J, Park KH, Park JW, Lee JH (2016) HLA allele frequencies in 5802 Koreans: varied allele types associated with SJS/TEN according to culprit drugs. Yonsei Med J 57:118–126  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3349/ymj.2016.57.1.118) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4696942/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26632391/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Park%20HJ,%20Kim%20YJ,%20Kim%20DH,%20Kim%20J,%20Park%20KH,%20Park%20JW,%20Lee%20JH%20(2016)%20HLA%20allele%20frequencies%20in%205802%20Koreans:%20varied%20allele%20types%20associated%20with%20SJS/TEN%20according%20to%20culprit%20drugs.%20Yonsei%20Med%20J%2057:118%E2%80%93126)

24. Saksit N, Tassaneeyakul W, Nakkam N, Konyoung P, Khunarkornsiri U, Chumworathayi P, Sukasem C, Suttisai S, Piriyachananusorn N, Tiwong P, Chaiyakunapruk N, Sawanyawisuth K, Rerkpattanapipat T, Tassaneeyakul W (2017) Risk factors of allopurinol-induced severe cutaneous adverse reactions in a Thai population. Pharmacogenet Genom 27:255–263  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0000000000000285) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28509689/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Saksit%20N,%20Tassaneeyakul%20W,%20Nakkam%20N,%20Konyoung%20P,%20Khunarkornsiri%20U,%20Chumworathayi%20P,%20Sukasem%20C,%20Suttisai%20S,%20Piriyachananusorn%20N,%20Tiwong%20P,%20Chaiyakunapruk%20N,%20Sawanyawisuth%20K,%20Rerkpattanapipat%20T,%20Tassaneeyakul%20W%20(2017)%20Risk%20factors%20of%20allopurinol-induced%20severe%20cutaneous%20adverse%20reactions%20in%20a%20Thai%20population.%20Pharmacogenet%20Genom%2027:255%E2%80%93263)

25. Saokaew S, Tassaneeyakul W, Maenthaisong R, Chaiyakunapruk N (2014) Cost-effectiveness analysis of HLA-B*5801 testing in preventing allopurinol-induced SJS/TEN in Thai population. PLoS ONE 9:e94294  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0094294) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3986079/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24732692/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Saokaew%20S,%20Tassaneeyakul%20W,%20Maenthaisong%20R,%20Chaiyakunapruk%20N%20(2014)%20Cost-effectiveness%20analysis%20of%20HLA-B*5801%20testing%20in%20preventing%20allopurinol-induced%20SJS/TEN%20in%20Thai%20population.%20PLoS%20ONE%209:e94294)

26. Somkrua R, Eickman EE, Saokaew S, Lohitnavy M, Chaiyakunapruk N (2011) Association of HLA-B*5801 allele and allopurinol-induced Stevens Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Med Genet 12:118  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2350-12-118) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3189112/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21906289/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Somkrua%20R,%20Eickman%20EE,%20Saokaew%20S,%20Lohitnavy%20M,%20Chaiyakunapruk%20N%20(2011)%20Association%20of%20HLA-B*5801%20allele%20and%20allopurinol-induced%20Stevens%20Johnson%20syndrome%20and%20toxic%20epidermal%20necrolysis:%20a%20systematic%20review%20and%20meta-analysis.%20BMC%20Med%20Genet%2012:118)

27. Tan LK, Mohd-Farid B, Salsabil S, Heselynn H, Wahinuddin S, Lau IS, Gun SC, Nor-Suhaila S, Eashwary M, Mohd-Shahrir MS, Ainon MM, Azmillah R, Muhaini O, Shahnaz M, Too CL (2016) HLA-A, -B, -C, -DRB1 and -DQB1 alleles and haplotypes in 951 Southeast Asia Malays from Peninsular Malaysia. Hum Immunol 77:818–819  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humimm.2016.06.022) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27370684/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Tan%20LK,%20Mohd-Farid%20B,%20Salsabil%20S,%20Heselynn%20H,%20Wahinuddin%20S,%20Lau%20IS,%20Gun%20SC,%20Nor-Suhaila%20S,%20Eashwary%20M,%20Mohd-Shahrir%20MS,%20Ainon%20MM,%20Azmillah%20R,%20Muhaini%20O,%20Shahnaz%20M,%20Too%20CL%20(2016)%20HLA-A,%20-B,%20-C,%20-DRB1%20and%20-DQB1%20alleles%20and%20haplotypes%20in%20951%20Southeast%20Asia%20Malays%20from%20Peninsular%20Malaysia.%20Hum%20Immunol%2077:818%E2%80%93819)

28. Tassaneeyakul W, Jantararoungtong T, Chen P, Lin PY, Tiamkao S, Khunarkornsiri U, Chucherd P, Konyoung P, Vannaprasaht S, Choonhakarn C, Pisuttimarn P, Sangviroon A, Tassaneeyakul W (2009) Strong association between HLA-B*5801 and allopurinol-induced Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis in a Thai population. Pharmacogenet Genomics 19:704–709  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0b013e328330a3b8) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19696695/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Tassaneeyakul%20W,%20Jantararoungtong%20T,%20Chen%20P,%20Lin%20PY,%20Tiamkao%20S,%20Khunarkornsiri%20U,%20Chucherd%20P,%20Konyoung%20P,%20Vannaprasaht%20S,%20Choonhakarn%20C,%20Pisuttimarn%20P,%20Sangviroon%20A,%20Tassaneeyakul%20W%20(2009)%20Strong%20association%20between%20HLA-B*5801%20and%20allopurinol-induced%20Stevens-Johnson%20syndrome%20and%20toxic%20epidermal%20necrolysis%20in%20a%20Thai%20population.%20Pharmacogenet%20Genomics%2019:704%E2%80%93709)

29. Teng GG, Tan-Koi WC, Dong D, Sung C (2020) Is HLA-B*58:01 genotyping cost effective in guiding allopurinol use in gout patients with chronic kidney disease? Pharmacogenomics 21(4):279–291. 10.2217/pgs-2019-0160  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2217/pgs-2019-0160) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32180492/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Teng%20GG,%20Tan-Koi%20WC,%20Dong%20D,%20Sung%20C%20(2020)%20Is%20HLA-B*58:01%20genotyping%20cost%20effective%20in%20guiding%20allopurinol%20use%20in%20gout%20patients%20with%20chronic%20kidney%20disease?%20Pharmacogenomics%2021(4):279%E2%80%93291.%2010.2217/pgs-2019-0160)

30. Too CL, Tan LK, Heselynn H, Nor-Shuhaila S, Eashwary M, Wahinuddin S, Lau IS, Gun SC, Mohd-Shahrir MS, Ainon MM, Azmillah R, Muhaini O, Shahnaz M (2019) HLA-A, -B, -C, -DRB1 and -DQB1 alleles and haplotypes in 194 Southeast Asia Chinese from Peninsular Malaysia. Hum Immunol 80:906–907  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humimm.2019.09.005) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31558331/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Too%20CL,%20Tan%20LK,%20Heselynn%20H,%20Nor-Shuhaila%20S,%20Eashwary%20M,%20Wahinuddin%20S,%20Lau%20IS,%20Gun%20SC,%20Mohd-Shahrir%20MS,%20Ainon%20MM,%20Azmillah%20R,%20Muhaini%20O,%20Shahnaz%20M%20(2019)%20HLA-A,%20-B,%20-C,%20-DRB1%20and%20-DQB1%20alleles%20and%20haplotypes%20in%20194%20Southeast%20Asia%20Chinese%20from%20Peninsular%20Malaysia.%20Hum%20Immunol%2080:906%E2%80%93907)

31. Yang CY, Chen CH, Deng ST, Huang CS, Lin YJ, Chen YJ, Wu CY, Hung SI, Chung WH (2015) Allopurinol use and risk of fatal hypersensitivity reactions: a nationwide population-based study in Taiwan. JAMA Intern Med 175:1550–1557  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2015.3536) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26193384/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Yang%20CY,%20Chen%20CH,%20Deng%20ST,%20Huang%20CS,%20Lin%20YJ,%20Chen%20YJ,%20Wu%20CY,%20Hung%20SI,%20Chung%20WH%20(2015)%20Allopurinol%20use%20and%20risk%20of%20fatal%20hypersensitivity%20reactions:%20a%20nationwide%20population-based%20study%20in%20Taiwan.%20JAMA%20Intern%20Med%20175:1550%E2%80%931557)

32. Yu KH, Yu CY, Fang YF (2017) Diagnostic utility of HLA-B*5801 screening in severe allopurinol hypersensitivity syndrome: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Rheum Dis 20(9):1057–1071. 10.1111/1756-185X.13143  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/1756-185X.13143) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28857441/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Yu%20KH,%20Yu%20CY,%20Fang%20YF%20(2017)%20Diagnostic%20utility%20of%20HLA-B*5801%20screening%20in%20severe%20allopurinol%20hypersensitivity%20syndrome:%20an%20updated%20systematic%20review%20and%20meta-analysis.%20Int%20J%20Rheum%20Dis%2020(9):1057%E2%80%931071.%2010.1111/1756-185X.13143)

33. Zhang X, Ma H, Hu C, Yu B, Ma W, Wu Z, Luo X, Zou H, Guan M (2015) Detection of HLA-B*58:01 with TaqMan assay and its association with allopurinol-induced sCADR. Clin Chem Lab Med 53:383–390  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1515/cclm-2014-0251) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25257159/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Zhang%20X,%20Ma%20H,%20Hu%20C,%20Yu%20B,%20Ma%20W,%20Wu%20Z,%20Luo%20X,%20Zou%20H,%20Guan%20M%20(2015)%20Detection%20of%20HLA-B*58:01%20with%20TaqMan%20assay%20and%20its%20association%20with%20allopurinol-induced%20sCADR.%20Clin%20Chem%20Lab%20Med%2053:383%E2%80%93390)

34. Zhang Y, Chen Y, Xu H, Fang J, Zhao Z, Hu W, Yang X, Ye J, Cheng Y, Wang J, Sun W, Wang J, Yang H, Yan J, Fang L (2020) SOAPTyping: an open-source and cross-platform tool for sequence-based typing for HLA class I and II alleles. BMC Bioinformatics 21:295  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-020-03624-0) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7646500/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32640979/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Zhang%20Y,%20Chen%20Y,%20Xu%20H,%20Fang%20J,%20Zhao%20Z,%20Hu%20W,%20Yang%20X,%20Ye%20J,%20Cheng%20Y,%20Wang%20J,%20Sun%20W,%20Wang%20J,%20Yang%20H,%20Yan%20J,%20Fang%20L%20(2020)%20SOAPTyping:%20an%20open-source%20and%20cross-platform%20tool%20for%20sequence-based%20typing%20for%20HLA%20class%20I%20and%20II%20alleles.%20BMC%20Bioinformatics%2021:295)

35. Zhao J, Hu L, Zhang L, Zhou M, Gao L, Cheng L (2019) Causative drugs for drug-induced cutaneous reactions in central China: a 608-case analysis. An Bras Dermatol 94:664–670  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.abd.2019.01.007) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6939179/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31789251/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Zhao%20J,%20Hu%20L,%20Zhang%20L,%20Zhou%20M,%20Gao%20L,%20Cheng%20L%20(2019)%20Causative%20drugs%20for%20drug-induced%20cutaneous%20reactions%20in%20central%20China:%20a%20608-case%20analysis.%20An%20Bras%20Dermatol%2094:664%E2%80%93670)
