# Effects of lifestyle and genetic polymorphisms on consumption of coffee or black tea and urinary caffeine levels.

## Metadata
**Authors:** M Yang Toshihiro Kawamoto Takahiko Kat Oh Koji Mastuno
**Journal:** Biomarkers : biochemical indicators of exposure, response, and susceptibility to chemicals
**Year:** 1998
**PMID:** 23899363

## Abstract

To find the cause of individual differences in caffeine intake and its metabolism, we investigated the effects of lifestyle and genetic polymorphisms of caffeine metabolic enzymes on coffee or black tea and urinary caffeine levels among 259 male Japanese. It was seen that cigarette smokers drank more coffee or black tea than non-smokers (p < 0.001). There was an inverse correlation between the amount of coffee or black tea consumed and age or the frequency of alcohol drinking (p < 0.05). Genetic polymorphisms of N -acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2), cytochrome P450 (CYP)1A1 and 2E1 did not significantly affect the habit of drinking coffee or black tea. The frequency of allele 1, the NAT2 allele of rapid acetylators, increased according to coffee or black tea consumption (0.05 < p < 0.1). Among lifestyle factors, two factors, i.e. smoking and the amount of coffee or black tea consumed, were related to urinary caffeine levels (p < 0.05). Geometric means of urinary caffeine levels were higher in the group who consumed higher amounts of coffee or black tea (p < 0.05) and those of smokers were lower than non-smokers- approximately 70% of non-smokers (p < 0.05). The genetic polymorphisms of NAT2, CYP1A1 and CYP2E1 were not significantly associated with the urinary caffeine levels according to each consumption level of coffee or black tea. This study suggests that smoking should be considered for the proper appreciation of individual differences in caffeine intake and urinary caffeine levels.
