# N-acetyltransferase polymorphism. Comparison of phenotype and genotype in humans.

## Metadata
**Authors:** D Hickman, E Sim
**Journal:** Biochemical pharmacology
**Year:** 1991
**PMID:** 1872889

## Abstract

N-Acetyltransferase (NAT) isoenzymes are encoded at two loci. One locus encodes an NAT which is expressed widely in tissues, does not vary amongst human individuals and is termed monomorphic NAT (mNAT). The second locus encodes an NAT which is termed polymorphic NAT (pNAT), has a distinct tissue distribution and is responsible for the difference in ability between individuals in acetylating certain arylamine (e.g. sulphamethazine) and hydrazine (e.g. isoniazid) drugs which are polymorphic substrates. We describe a simple DNA based method for genotyping individuals for pNAT. The 'fast' NAT allele (F1) and the three 'slow' alleles (S1, S2 and S3) can be distinguished by using PCR with oligonucleotide primers specific for pNAT followed by restriction enzyme digestion of the amplified product. Heterozygotes are easily identified. The genotype of individual Caucasians compares well with the extent of acetylation of sulphamethazine. The allele distribution of the Caucasian population described here differs from that reported after Southern blot analysis of a Japanese population (Deguchi et al., J Biol Chem 265: 12757-12760, 1990). The most frequent allele at the polymorphic nat locus in Caucasians, S1, is absent in the Japanese population. This difference between the two populations is likely to be the basis of the known interethnic variation in acetylator phenotype frequencies.
