# Differential impact of the CYP3A5*1 and CYP3A5*3 alleles on pre-dose concentrations of two tacrolimus formulations.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Markus Wehland, Steffen Bauer, Susanne Brakemeier, Philip Burgwinkel, Petra Glander, Reinhold Kreutz, Christine Lorkowski, Torsten Slowinski, Hans H Neumayer, Klemens Budde
**Journal:** Pharmacogenetics and genomics
**Year:** 2011
**PMID:** 20818295

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVES:** We investigated the pharmacokinetic and pharmacogenetic implications of conversion from a twice-daily (P-Tac) to a once-daily (A-Tac) tacrolimus (Tac) formulation.

**METHODS:** We analyzed Tac levels in a cohort of 41 renal transplant patients with a stable graft function over a period of 1 year before and after conversion.

**RESULTS:** After conversion, the patients had, on average, significantly lower Tac trough and dose-normalized trough levels (14%, P=0.0004 and 23%, P=0.001, respectively) despite similar doses. CYP3A5*3/*3 patients (n=27) required significantly lower Tac doses with both the formulations to reach Tac target levels (P-Tac 39%, P=0.011; A-Tac 36%, P=0.003) compared with *1/*3 patients (n=13). Interestingly, after the conversion, mean Tac trough levels and dose-normalized trough level remained almost constant in *1/*3 patients, but decreased significantly in *3/*3 patients (16%, P=0.001 and 25%, P=0.006).

**CONCLUSION:** This study provides further evidence that the CYP3A5*1/*3 polymorphism significantly impacts Tac pharmacokinetics. Moreover, we show for the first time a pharmacogenetic effect on two different Tac formulations, as Tac trough levels of *3/*3 patients declined significantly after conversion to identical A-Tac doses.
