# Comparison of pharmacokinetics and pharmacogenetics of once- and twice-daily tacrolimus in the early stage after renal transplantation.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Takenori Niioka, Shigeru Satoh, Hideaki Kagaya, Kazuyuki Numakura, Takamitsu Inoue, Mitsuru Saito, Shintaro Narita, Norihiko Tsuchiya, Tomonori Habuchi, Masatomo Miura
**Journal:** Transplantation
**Year:** 2012
**PMID:** 23073468

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** This study investigated pharmacokinetic and pharmacogenetic differences between a modified-release once-daily formulation of tacrolimus (Tac-QD) and the original formulation requiring twice-daily intake (Tac-BID) in de novo renal transplant recipients.

**METHODS:** Forty-seven and 25 patients who received Tac-BID and Tac-QD, respectively, were enrolled. The pharmacokinetics and CYP3A5 6986A>G and ABCB1 3435C>T pharmacogenetics of each formulation were analyzed on day 28 posttransplantation.

**RESULTS:** The dose-adjusted trough level (C0) and area under the concentration-time curve (AUC0-24) of tacrolimus were approximately 25% lower for Tac-QD than Tac-BID. However, there was a good correlation between the AUC0-24 and C0 in the Tac-BID and Tac-QD groups (r=0.575, P<0.001; and r=0.638, P<0.001, respectively) and a similar coefficient in each regression equation. The dose-adjusted AUC0-24 was approximately 25% lower in carriers of the CYP3A*1 allele (CYP3A5 expressers), but not individuals with the CYP3A*3/*3 genotype (nonexpressers), for TAC-QD than Tac-BID. In the Tac-QD group, the interpatient variability for dose-adjusted parameters was small, and the interquatile ranges of dose-adjusted parameters differed between CYP3A5 expressers and nonexpressers and did not overlap. The ABCB1 polymorphism was not associated with any pharmacokinetic parameters of Tac-QD.

**CONCLUSIONS:** C0-guided monitoring may lead to similar AUC0-24 values for both formulations. However, to maintain the same AUC0-24 value, a higher dose of Tac-QD than Tac-BID may be needed, especially for CYP3A5 expressers, in the early stage posttransplantation. The narrow interindividual variability of Tac-QD pharmacokinetics and its difference between CYP3A5 expressers and nonexpressers might contribute to a dosing strategy based on CYP3A5 genotype.
