# Association between interleukin-18 promoter variants and tacrolimus pharmacokinetics in Chinese renal transplant patients.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Jiazhen Xing, Xiaoqing Zhang, Junwei Fan, Bin Shen, Tongyi Men, Jianning Wang
**Journal:** European journal of clinical pharmacology
**Year:** 2015
**PMID:** 25487141

## Abstract

**PURPOSE:** Interleukin 18 (IL-18) is a potent proinflammatory cytokine thought to down-regulate cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme activities. This study aimed to assess the potential influence of two functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the IL-18 promoter region on the tacrolimus pharmacokinetics in Chinese renal transplant patients.

**METHODS:** We enrolled 96 renal allograft recipients receiving tacrolimus-based immunosuppressive regiments. Two functional SNPs in the IL-18 gene promoter region at the positions -137G/C (rs187283) and -607A/C (rs1946518) and one SNP (rs776746) of CYP3A5 were genotyped using a Mass ARRAY platform. Tacrolimus daily doses (mg/day) and trough tacrolimus concentration (ng/ml) were continuously recorded for 1 month after transplantation.

**RESULTS:** The tacrolimus C/D ratio was significantly associated with the IL-18 rs1946518 gene polymorphism in the first month after transplantation (P = 0.0225). We studied the influence of its polymorphism on tacrolimus C/D ratios in subjects with different CYP3A5 genotype backgrounds, and among patients with CYP3A5 expressers, the difference among the three genotypes was even more striking (P < 0.001). We did not find significant differences in tacrolimus C/D ratios between the IL-18 rs187238 genotypes, either nominally or according to the CYP3A5 genotype. In a simple linear regression model, age, hemoglobin (Hb), CYP3A5 gene polymorphisms, and IL-18 A-607C gene polymorphisms were associated with log-transformed tacrolimus C/D ratios (P < 0.05). In the final multiple linear regression model, CYP3A5 polymorphisms were the most important variant, accounting for 19.5 % of total variation involved in tacrolimus pharmacokinetics.

**CONCLUSION:** Our findings suggest that a combined analysis of CYP3A5 and IL-18 promoter polymorphisms may help clinicians develop individualized tacrolimus treatment, which is based on determining CYP3A5 genotype.
