# Retracted: Polymorphisms of tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin-10, cytochrome P450 3A5 and ABCB1 in Chinese liver transplant patients treated with immunosuppressant tacrolimus.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Dan Li, Ji-Ye Zhu, Jie Gao, Xin Wang, Ya-Qing Lou, Guo-Liang Zhang
**Journal:** Clinica chimica acta; international journal of clinical chemistry
**Year:** 2007
**PMID:** 17568575

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** Cytokine production in the host immune response after transplantation may contribute to the variable CYP3A-dependent drug disposition. We investigated the effect of TNF-alpha, IL-10, CYP3A5 and ABCB1 polymorphisms on immunosuppressant tacrolimus pharmacokinetics in liver transplant patients.

**METHODS:** Genetic polymorphisms in TNF-alpha, IL-10, CYP3A5 and ABCB1 were studied in 70 liver transplant recipients and 70 donors. Tacrolimus dosage and blood concentration were investigated at 1, 2 and 3 weeks after transplantation.

**RESULTS:** The IL-10 G-1082A polymorphism in recipients was significantly associated with tacrolimus concentration/dose (C/D) ratios (IL-10-1082GG < GA < AA) within the first 3weeks posttransplantation (P < 0.05). Recipients with the capacity for low IL-10 production (-1082AA) carrying CYP3A5 non-expressor (CYP3A5()3/()3) liver had the highest C/D ratios (mean: 172.4, 161.7, 160.3 for 1, 2 and 3 weeks posttransplantation, respectively), whereas recipients with intermediate or high production of IL-10 (-1082GA or GG) engrafted with CYP3A5 expressor (CYP3A5()1 carrier) liver were found to have the lowest ratios (96.4, 78.0 and 75.4, respectively, P < 0.01).

**CONCLUSIONS:** The IL-10 G-1082A and CYP3A5()3 polymorphisms may influence the interindividual variability of tacrolimus pharmacokinetics in Chinese liver transplant patients. This finding provided a new interpretation for the variable immunosuprressant disposition after transplantation.
