# Clinical and genetic factors affecting tacrolimus trough levels and drug-related outcomes in Korean kidney transplant recipients.

## Metadata
**Authors:** In-Wha Kim, Yoo Jin Moon, Eunhee Ji, Kyung Im Kim, Nayoung Han, Sung Ju Kim, Wan Gyoon Shin, Jongwon Ha, Jeong-Hyun Yoon, Hye Suk Lee, Jung Mi Oh
**Journal:** European journal of clinical pharmacology
**Year:** 2012
**PMID:** 22183771

## Abstract

**PURPOSE:** The purpose of this study was to characterize the effects of clinical and genetic variables on the pharmacokinetics and complications of tacrolimus during the first year after kidney transplantation.

**METHODS:** One hundred and thirty-two Korean kidney recipients who received tacrolimus were genotyped for ABCB1 (exons 12, 21, and 26) and CYP3A5 (intron 3). Tacrolimus trough levels, dose, or dose-adjusted trough levels and complications were compared among patients during the early stage (3, 7, 14, 30, and 90 days) and up to 1 year according to the genotypes.

**RESULTS:** A donor source-adjusted linear mixed model with multilevel analysis adjusting for age, body weight, hematocrit, and serum creatinine showed that CYP3A5 genotype is associated with dose-adjusted level of tacrolimus (p < 0.001). The influence of ABCB1 polymorphisms on the pharmacokinetics or complications of tacrolimus was less certain in our study. The incidence of acute rejections was significantly higher in recipients of cadaveric donor kidney (p < 0.05).

**CONCLUSIONS:** A generalized estimating equation model analysis showed that alopecia and hyperlipidemia were associated with dose-adjusted level of tacrolimus (p < 0.001). Genotype of CYP3A5 variants along with significant clinical covariates may be useful in individualizing tacrolimus therapy in kidney transplantation patients.
