# The investigation of allele and genotype frequencies of CYP3A5 (1/3) and P2Y12 (T744C) in Iran.

## Metadata
**Authors:** N Azarpira, S Namazi, A Khalili, M Tabesh
**Journal:** Molecular biology reports
**Year:** 2011
**PMID:** 21153923

## Abstract

Research on the frequency of the highly functional mutations of genes coding required for metabolizing enzymes has shown significant ethnic variations. However, few studies, if any, have examined the frequency distribution of major allelic variations in the context of Iran. In this regard, the present study focused on the genotype profile of Southern Iranians in order to compare allele frequencies of their CYP3A5 and P2Y12 (T744C) which have been shown to have roles in metabolizing clopidogrel, with those of other populations. Therefore, genotyping was carried out on 112 unrelated individuals by PCR-RFLP. The CYP3A5*3 allele was found in 185 persons with allelic frequency 0.82, which is the most common allele among Caucasians (90-95%). The frequency of 82% is different from other Caucasians (90-94%), Indians (67%), Vietnam (67%) and Africans (15%). but lower than frequency in Chinese populations (74%) and Korean (76%). The allele frequency of the -744T (4%) is different from frequencies of Caucasian, American, Chinese, Korean, and Subsahara population. This study confirmed significant inter-ethnic differences in CYP3A5 and P2Y12 frequencies between Iranians and other ethnic groups. The results of this study will be useful for clinical pharmacokinetic investigations and drug dosage recommendations especially antiplatelet drugs such as Clopidogrel, for Iranians.
