# Relevance of CYP3A4*20, UGT1A1*37 and UGT1A1*28 variants in irinotecan‐induced severe toxicity

## Metadata
**Authors:** Pau Riera, Juliana Salazar, Anna C Virgili, María Tobeña, Ana Sebio, Pía Gallano, Agustí Barnadas, David Páez
**Journal:** British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology
**Date:** 2018 Apr 16
**DOI:** [10.1111/bcp.13574](https://doi.org/10.1111/bcp.13574)
**PMID:** 29504153
**PMCID:** PMC5980573
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5980573/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5980573/pdf/BCP-84-1389.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5980573/pdf/BCP-84-1389.pdf)

## Abstract

Severe irinotecan‐induced toxicity is associated with UGT1A1 polymorphisms. However, some patients develop side‐effects despite harbouring a normal UGT1A1 genotype. As CYP3A4 is also an irinotecan‐metabolizing enzyme, our study aimed to elucidate the influence of the CYP3A4*20 loss‐of‐function allele in the toxicity profile of these patients. Three‐hundred and eight metastatic colorectal cancer patients treated with an irinotecan‐containing chemotherapy were studied. The presence of CYP3A4*20, UGT1A1*37 and UGT1A1*28 alleles was tested. Associations between these genetic variants and toxicity were evaluated. UGT1A1*28 was significantly associated with severe diarrhoea, neutropenia and asthenia (P = 0.002, P = 0.037 and P = 0.041, respectively). One patient with the UGT1A1*28/*37 genotype presented with grade IV neutropenia and lethal septic shock. One heterozygous UGT1A1 (*1/*28) patient also carried the CYP3A4*20 allele but did not develop toxicity. We confirm that UGT1A1*37 and UGT1A1*28 are associated with severe toxicity and suggest that the CYP3A4*20 allele does not play a role in irinotecan‐induced toxicity.

Keywords: colorectal cancer, CYP3A4*20, irinotecan, toxicity, UGT1A1*28, UGT1A1*37

## Introduction

[http://www.guidetopharmacology.org/GRAC/LigandDisplayForward?ligandId=6823](http://www.guidetopharmacology.org/GRAC/LigandDisplayForward?ligandId=6823) [also known as camptothecin‐11 (CPT‐11)] is an active drug that is widely used for the treatment of several types of cancer, including colorectal, gastric and pancreatic cancer. Its dose‐limiting and potentially life‐threatening toxicities are delayed diarrhoea and severe neutropenia, which can occur in up to 36% of patients [1](#bcp13574-bib-0001).

Several enzymes are involved in the metabolism of irinotecan, highlighting the [http://www.guidetopharmacology.org/GRAC/ObjectDisplayForward?objectId=2990](http://www.guidetopharmacology.org/GRAC/ObjectDisplayForward?objectId=2990), encoded by the *UGT1A1* gene. The number of TA repeats in its TATA box is associated with the enzyme activity. Whereas six TA repeats imply normal activity (*UGT1A1*1*), seven TA repeats (*UGT1A1*28*) or eight TA repeats (*UGT1A1*37*) reduce activity markedly. The *UGT1A1*28* allele is strongly associated with irinotecan‐induced toxicity [2](#bcp13574-bib-0002), [3](#bcp13574-bib-0003), [4](#bcp13574-bib-0004). The *UGT1A1*37* allele is rare in the Caucasian population [5](#bcp13574-bib-0005), and its influence on irinotecan toxicity has not yet been reported. However, some patients carrying a normal *UGT1A1* genotype (**1/*1*) develop severe diarrhoea and/or neutropenia. Identification of additional toxicity biomarkers that could help to individualize irinotecan treatment is therefore of major clinical interest in the management of cancer patients.

The enzyme cytochrome P450 3A4 ([http://www.guidetopharmacology.org/GRAC/ObjectDisplayForward?objectId=1337](http://www.guidetopharmacology.org/GRAC/ObjectDisplayForward?objectId=1337)) converts irinotecan into several inactive oxidation products, such as 7‐ethyl‐10‐[4‐*N*‐(5‐aminopentanoic acid)‐1‐piperidino]‐carbonyloxycamptothecin (APC) and 7‐ethyl‐10‐[4‐amino‐1‐piperidino]‐carbonyloxycamptothecin (NPC). Although the CYP3A4 phenotype is associated with irinotecan pharmacokinetics [6](#bcp13574-bib-0006), [7](#bcp13574-bib-0007), no significant associations between *CYP3A4* genotype and irinotecan toxicity have been found [8](#bcp13574-bib-0008). Three *CYP3A4* nonfunctional alleles result from premature stop codons in the coding gene **6*, **20* and **26 CYP3A4* alleles. In Caucasians, these variants are extremely rare, but a frequency of 1.2% of carriers of *CYP3A4*20* has recently been reported in the Spanish population as the result of a founder effect [9](#bcp13574-bib-0009).

This state of knowledge prompted us to evaluate whether the presence of the *CYP3A4*20* allele could help to identify patients who develop severe irinotecan‐induced toxicity despite having a normal *UGT1A1* genotype. We genotyped the *UGT1A1* (TA repeats) and the *CYP3A4*20* variant in a cohort of 308 metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) patients treated with an irinotecan‐containing therapy.

## Methods

### Patient population

The study included 308 mCRC patients treated with an irinotecan‐containing therapy at Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau (HSCSP, Barcelona, Spain). Genomic DNA was available in all cases. Left colon cancer was diagnosed in 144 patients, right colon cancer in 76 and rectum cancer in 88. A total of 283 patients received irinotecan combined with fluorouracil and leucovorin (FOLFIRI), 176 of whom were enrolled in clinical trials [10](#bcp13574-bib-0010), [11](#bcp13574-bib-0011). The remaining patients received either irinotecan monotherapy or another chemotherapeutic regimen containing irinotecan. Patients were administered chemotherapy until unacceptable toxicity or disease progression. Table [1](#bcp13574-tbl-0001) shows patients' baseline clinical characteristics.

### Table 1.

| Characteristic | n | % |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Gender |   |   |
| Male | 191 | 62 |
| Female | 117 | 38 |
| Age (years) |   |   |
| <75 | 265 | 86 |
| ≥75 | 43 | 14 |
| Primary tumour site |   |   |
| Right colon | 76 | 25 |
| Left colon | 144 | 47 |
| Rectum | 88 | 29 |
| Chemotherapy treatment |   |   |
| FOLFIRI | 283 | 92 |
| Irinotecan monotherapy | 13 | 4 |
| Other irinotecan combinations | 12 | 4 |
| Line of chemotherapy |   |   |
| First line | 244 | 79 |
| ≥Second line | 64 | 21 |

Table 1 Caption: Baseline patient characteristics (n = 308)

Relevant clinical data (gender, age and line of chemotherapy) were collected retrospectively through chart review. Toxicity was graded according to the common toxicity criteria (CTC) v4.0: presence and grade of diarrhoea, neutropenia, febrile neutropenia, asthenia, nausea and mucositis. The most severe grade of toxicity was recorded in all cases. The study was approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee at HSCSP, and all study participants gave informed consent to participate.

### Genotyping of UGT1A1 and CYP3A4

*UGT1A1* genotyping was performed as previously described [10](#bcp13574-bib-0010). *CYP3A4*20* (rs67666821) genotyping was carried out by automatic sequencing of a fragment of 244 base pairs in exon 13, which was specifically amplified using the primers FW (5′‐TGAAGGAGTGTCTCACTC‐3′) and RV (5′‐AGGTCTCTGGTGTTCTCAG‐3′).

### Statistical analyses

Allele frequencies were calculated by direct counting. The associations between the toxicities assessed and the afore‐mentioned genetic variants were analysed using chi‐square tests. The results were considered statistically significant if *P* <0.05.

### Nomenclature of targets and ligands

Key protein targets and ligands in this article are hyperlinked to corresponding entries in [http://www.guidetopharmacology.org](http://www.guidetopharmacology.org), the common portal for data from the IUPHAR/BPS Guide to PHARMACOLOGY [12](#bcp13574-bib-0012), and are permanently archived in the Concise Guide to PHARMACOLOGY 2017/18 [13](#bcp13574-bib-0013).

## Results

A total of 137 of the 308 patients developed some type of grade III/IV toxicity. The most common severe adverse effects observed were neutropenia (68 patients, 22%), asthenia (65 patients, 21%) and diarrhoea (55 patients, 18%). Twenty‐seven patients experienced severe nausea, nine patients presented with severe mucositis, eight patients experienced febrile neutropenia and two developed septic shock.

The frequencies of the genetic variants studied were consistent with Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium. For the *UGT1A1* variants, we found 44.2% *(*1/*1)*, 46.4% *(*1/*28)*, 9.1% *(*28/*28)* and 0.3% *(*28/*37)*. The allelic frequency of *UGT1A1*28* was 32%, within the range reported in Spanish populations [14](#bcp13574-bib-0014). The genotype frequencies for the *CYP3A4*20* variant were 99.7% *(*1/*1)* and 0.3% *(*1/*20)*.

There was a clear association between the *UGT1A1*28/*28* genotype and the occurrence of severe diarrhoea (*P* = 0.002), neutropenia (*P* = 0.037) and asthenia (*P* = 0.041) (Table [2](#bcp13574-tbl-0002)). The presence of nausea or mucositis was not significantly associated with the *UGT1A1*28/*28* genotype (*P* = 0.495 and *P* = 0.595, respectively).

### Table 2.

| Genotype | n (%) | Diarrhoea (%) | Neutropenia (%) | Asthenia (%) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| *1/*1 | 136 (44.2%) | 18 (13.2%) | 23 (16.9%) | 23 (16.9%) |
| *1/*28 | 143 (46.4%) | 25 (17.5%) | 34 (23.8%) | 31 (21.7%) |
| *28/*28 | 28 (9.1%) | 12 (42.9%) | 10 (35.7%) | 10 (35.7%) |
| *28/*37 | 1 (0.32%) | 0 (0%) | 1 (100%) | 1 (100%) |
| P |   | 0.002a | 0.037a | 0.041a |

Table 2 Caption: Associations between UGT1A1 genotypes and grade III–IV diarrhoea, neutropenia and asthenia

The extremely rare *UGT1A1* genotype **28/*37* was identified in one mCRC patient who received a reduced dose of irinotecan monotherapy (150 mg m^−2^) as a second‐line treatment. The patient developed grade IV neutropenia and febrile neutropenia; neutropenic colitis was diagnosed and led to lethal septic shock.

Thirty‐eight out of 136 patients (28%) with a *UGT1A1*1/*1* genotype presented with severe diarrhoea and/or neutropenia, despite the normal enzymatic activity associated with this genotype. None of these patients harboured the nonfunctional *CYP3A4*20* allele. One patient out of 308 carried the *CYP3A4*20* variant. This patient, with the *UGT1A1*1/*28* genotype, received the FOLFIRI regimen as first‐line treatment and cetuximab–irinotecan as second‐line treatment without any of the toxicities assessed.

## Discussion

We investigated the role of the *CYP3A4*20* allele in mCRC patients with a normal *UGT1A1* genotype treated with an irinotecan‐containing regimen. We found that *UGT1A1*37* and *UGT1A1*28* alleles were highly associated with severe toxicity to irinotecan treatment, whereas the presence of the *CYP3A4*20* allele was not associated with toxicity in our sample.

Patients harbouring the *UGT1A1*28/*28* genotype (Gilbert's syndrome) are at risk of severe irinotecan‐induced toxicity [2](#bcp13574-bib-0002), [4](#bcp13574-bib-0004). Our findings confirmed this association, as the presence of this genotype was statistically significant for diarrhoea, neutropenia and asthenia (*P* = 0.002, *P* = 0.037 and *P* = 0.041, respectively). One patient who carried the infrequent *UGT1A1*28/*37* genotype developed fatal toxicity, despite the reduced doses of irinotecan administered. One explanation for this could be that the additive effect of the *UGT1A1*37* allele reduces enzyme activity even more than the *UGT1A1*28* allele [15](#bcp13574-bib-0015). This case study reinforces the clinical relevance of identifying such a low‐frequency nonfunctional variant before prescribing irinotecan. However, further studies are needed in order to confirm the role of this genetic variant in severe irinotecan‐induced toxicity.

Several phenotypic studies have focused on the role of the enzymatic activity of CYP3A4 in irinotecan‐induced toxicity. In 2008, Rouits *et al*. [16](#bcp13574-bib-0016) estimated CYP3A4 activity from cortisol biotransformation into 6β‐hydroxycortisol. They found that the level of cortisol 6β‐hydroxylation predicted the occurrence of diarrhoea. Later, in 2010, van der Bol *et al*. [17](#bcp13574-bib-0017) conducted a randomized trial in which an irinotecan dose of 350 mg m^−2^ was administered in the control group, whereas the dose was calculated using an algorithm that considered midazolam clearance in the experimental group. They found a significant reduction in the incidence of grades III–IV neutropenia in the experimental group but no differences in grades III–IV diarrhoea [17](#bcp13574-bib-0017). Recently, Makihara *et al*. [18](#bcp13574-bib-0018) conducted a study to evaluate the influence of concomitant use of clarithromycin, a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor, on irinotecan toxicity. The study did not identify an increase in irinotecan‐induced toxicity by coadministration of clarithromycin [18](#bcp13574-bib-0018). To the best of our knowledge, to date, only one genotypic study, performed in 177 Japanese cancer patients, has evaluated the influence of variants in the *CYP3A4* gene on irinotecan‐induced toxicity; no significant association was found [8](#bcp13574-bib-0008).

Recently, a frequency of 1.2% of the loss‐of‐function *CYP3A4*20* allele was described in a Spanish population [9](#bcp13574-bib-0009). In the light of these data, and taking into account the role of CYP3A4 in the metabolism of irinotecan, we hypothesized that the presence of the *CYP3A4*20* allele could help to identify patients who will develop severe irinotecan‐induced toxicity despite having a normal *UGT1A1* genotype. We found one patient carrying the *CYP3A4*20* allele (0.3%), a frequency similar to that found in a previous study recently performed by our group [19](#bcp13574-bib-0019) and lower than that reported previously by Apellániz‐Ruiz *et al*. [9](#bcp13574-bib-0009). The only patient in our cohort who carried the *CYP3A4*20* variant was also heterozygous *(*1/*28)* for *UGT1A1*. She did not experience any of the toxicities evaluated in our study. Our findings add uncertainty about the effect of a loss‐of‐function *CYP3A4* allele on severe irinotecan‐induced toxicity.

## Competing Interests

There are no competing interests to declare.

*This work was supported by a grant from the Departament d'Economia i Coneixement de la Generalitat de Catalunya (2016FI_B 00368 to Pau Riera)*.

Riera, P. , Salazar, J. , Virgili, A. C. , Tobeña, M. , Sebio, A. , Gallano, P. , Barnadas, A. , and Páez, D. (2018) Relevance of CYP3A4*20, UGT1A1*37 and UGT1A1*28 variants in irinotecan‐induced severe toxicity. Br J Clin Pharmacol, 84: 1389–1392. doi: [10.1111/bcp.13574](https://doi.org/10.1111/bcp.13574).

## References

1. Fuchs CS, Moore MR, Harker G, Villa L, Rinaldi D, Hecht JR. Phase III comparison of two irinotecan dosing regimens in second‐line therapy of metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 2003; 21: 807–814.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2003.08.058) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12610178/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Phase%20III%20comparison%20of%20two%20irinotecan%20dosing%20regimens%20in%20second%E2%80%90line%20therapy%20of%20metastatic%20colorectal%20cancer&author=CS%20Fuchs&author=MR%20Moore&author=G%20Harker&author=L%20Villa&author=D%20Rinaldi&volume=21&publication_year=2003&pages=807-814&pmid=12610178&doi=10.1200/JCO.2003.08.058&)

2. Innocenti F, Undevia SD, Iyer L, Chen PX, Das S, Kocherginsky M, et al Genetic variants in the UDP‐glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 gene predict the risk of severe neutropenia of irinotecan. J Clin Oncol 2004; 22: 1382–1388.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2004.07.173) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15007088/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Genetic%20variants%20in%20the%20UDP%E2%80%90glucuronosyltransferase%201A1%20gene%20predict%20the%20risk%20of%20severe%20neutropenia%20of%20irinotecan&author=F%20Innocenti&author=SD%20Undevia&author=L%20Iyer&author=PX%20Chen&author=S%20Das&volume=22&publication_year=2004&pages=1382-1388&pmid=15007088&doi=10.1200/JCO.2004.07.173&)

3. Rouits E, Boisdron‐Celle M, Dumont A, Guérin O, Morel A, Gamelin E. Relevance of different UGT1A1 polymorphisms in irinotecan‐induced toxicity: a molecular and clinical study of 75 patients. Clin Cancer Res 2004; 10: 5151–5159.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-03-0548) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15297419/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Cancer%20Res&title=Relevance%20of%20different%20UGT1A1%20polymorphisms%20in%20irinotecan%E2%80%90induced%20toxicity:%20a%20molecular%20and%20clinical%20study%20of%2075%20patients&author=E%20Rouits&author=M%20Boisdron%E2%80%90Celle&author=A%20Dumont&author=O%20Gu%C3%A9rin&author=A%20Morel&volume=10&publication_year=2004&pages=5151-5159&pmid=15297419&doi=10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-03-0548&)

4. Marcuello E, Altés A, Menoyo A, Del Rio E, Gómez‐Pardo M, Baiget M. UGT1A1 gene variations and irinotecan treatment in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer 2004; 91: 678–682.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bjc.6602042) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2364770/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15280927/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Br%20J%20Cancer&title=UGT1A1%20gene%20variations%20and%20irinotecan%20treatment%20in%20patients%20with%20metastatic%20colorectal%20cancer&author=E%20Marcuello&author=A%20Alt%C3%A9s&author=A%20Menoyo&author=E%20Del%20Rio&author=M%20G%C3%B3mez%E2%80%90Pardo&volume=91&publication_year=2004&pages=678-682&pmid=15280927&doi=10.1038/sj.bjc.6602042&)

5. Peña L, Pico M, Rosatelli C, Meloni A, del Río E, Tizzano EF, et al UGT1A1 genotype in a white boy with Crigler‐Najjar syndrome type 2. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2012; 55: e136–e137.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/MPG.0b013e318234ecd9) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22722682/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Pediatr%20Gastroenterol%20Nutr&title=UGT1A1%20genotype%20in%20a%20white%20boy%20with%20Crigler%E2%80%90Najjar%20syndrome%20type%202&author=L%20Pe%C3%B1a&author=M%20Pico&author=C%20Rosatelli&author=A%20Meloni&author=E%20del%20R%C3%ADo&volume=55&publication_year=2012&pages=e136-e137&pmid=22722682&doi=10.1097/MPG.0b013e318234ecd9&)

6. Mathijssen RHJ, de Jong FA, van Schaik RHN, Lepper ER, Friberg LE, Rietveld T, et al Prediction of irinotecan pharmacokinetics by use of cytochrome P450 3A4 phenotyping probes. J Natl Cancer Inst 2004; 96: 1585–1592.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djh298) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15523087/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Natl%20Cancer%20Inst&title=Prediction%20of%20irinotecan%20pharmacokinetics%20by%20use%20of%20cytochrome%20P450%203A4%20phenotyping%20probes&author=RHJ%20Mathijssen&author=FA%20de%20Jong&author=RHN%20van%20Schaik&author=ER%20Lepper&author=LE%20Friberg&volume=96&publication_year=2004&pages=1585-1592&pmid=15523087&doi=10.1093/jnci/djh298&)

7. Kehrer DFS, Mathijssen RHJ, Verweij J, de Bruijn P, Sparreboom A. Modulation of irinotecan metabolism by ketoconazole. J Clin Oncol 2002; 20: 3122–3129.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2002.08.177) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12118026/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Modulation%20of%20irinotecan%20metabolism%20by%20ketoconazole&author=DFS%20Kehrer&author=RHJ%20Mathijssen&author=J%20Verweij&author=P%20de%20Bruijn&author=A%20Sparreboom&volume=20&publication_year=2002&pages=3122-3129&pmid=12118026&doi=10.1200/JCO.2002.08.177&)

8. Sai K, Saito Y, Fukushima‐Uesaka H, Kurose K, Kaniwa N, Kamatani N, et al Impact of CYP3A4 haplotypes on irinotecan pharmacokinetics in Japanese cancer patients. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2008; 62: 529–537.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00280-007-0634-1) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17992531/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Chemother%20Pharmacol&title=Impact%20of%20CYP3A4%20haplotypes%20on%20irinotecan%20pharmacokinetics%20in%20Japanese%20cancer%20patients&author=K%20Sai&author=Y%20Saito&author=H%20Fukushima%E2%80%90Uesaka&author=K%20Kurose&author=N%20Kaniwa&volume=62&publication_year=2008&pages=529-537&pmid=17992531&doi=10.1007/s00280-007-0634-1&)

9. Apellániz‐Ruiz M, Inglada‐Pérez L, Naranjo MEG, Sánchez L, Mancikova V, Currás‐Freixes M, et al High frequency and founder effect of the CYP3A4*20 loss‐of‐function allele in the Spanish population classifies CYP3A4 as a polymorphic enzyme. Pharmacogenomics J 2015; 15: 288–292.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/tpj.2014.67) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25348618/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics%20J&title=High%20frequency%20and%20founder%20effect%20of%20the%20CYP3A4*20%20loss%E2%80%90of%E2%80%90function%20allele%20in%20the%20Spanish%20population%20classifies%20CYP3A4%20as%20a%20polymorphic%20enzyme&author=M%20Apell%C3%A1niz%E2%80%90Ruiz&author=L%20Inglada%E2%80%90P%C3%A9rez&author=MEG%20Naranjo&author=L%20S%C3%A1nchez&author=V%20Mancikova&volume=15&publication_year=2015&pages=288-292&pmid=25348618&doi=10.1038/tpj.2014.67&)

10. Marcuello E, Páez D, Paré L, Salazar J, Sebio A, del Rio E, et al A genotype‐directed phase I‐IV dose‐finding study of irinotecan in combination with fluorouracil/leucovorin as first‐line treatment in advanced colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer 2011; 105: 53–57.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/bjc.2011.206) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3137420/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21654688/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Br%20J%20Cancer&title=A%20genotype%E2%80%90directed%20phase%20I%E2%80%90IV%20dose%E2%80%90finding%20study%20of%20irinotecan%20in%20combination%20with%20fluorouracil/leucovorin%20as%20first%E2%80%90line%20treatment%20in%20advanced%20colorectal%20cancer&author=E%20Marcuello&author=D%20P%C3%A1ez&author=L%20Par%C3%A9&author=J%20Salazar&author=A%20Sebio&volume=105&publication_year=2011&pages=53-57&pmid=21654688&doi=10.1038/bjc.2011.206&)

11. Paez D, Tobeña M, Sebio A, Fernandez‐Plana J, Martin M, Virgili A, et al Pharmacogenetic clinical randomized phase II trial to evaluate the efficacy and safety of FOLFIRI with high dose of irinotecan (FOLFIRI‐HD) in metastatic colorectal cancer patients according to UGT1A 1 genotype. Ann Oncol 2017; 28 (Suppl. 3).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41416-018-0348-7) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6342907/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30585257/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann%20Oncol&title=Pharmacogenetic%20clinical%20randomized%20phase%20II%20trial%20to%20evaluate%20the%20efficacy%20and%20safety%20of%20FOLFIRI%20with%20high%20dose%20of%20irinotecan%20(FOLFIRI%E2%80%90HD)%20in%20metastatic%20colorectal%20cancer%20patients%20according%20to%20UGT1A%201%20genotype&author=D%20Paez&author=M%20Tobe%C3%B1a&author=A%20Sebio&author=J%20Fernandez%E2%80%90Plana&author=M%20Martin&volume=28&issue=Suppl.%203&publication_year=2017&pmid=30585257&doi=10.1038/s41416-018-0348-7&)

12. Harding SD, Sharman JL, Faccenda E, Southan C, Pawson AJ, Ireland S, et al The IUPHAR/BPS guide to PHARMACOLOGY in 2018: updates and expansion to encompass the new guide to IMMUNOPHARMACOLOGY. Nucl Acids Res 2018; 46 (D1): D1091–D1106.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx1121) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5753190/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29149325/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucl%20Acids%20Res&title=The%20IUPHAR/BPS%20guide%20to%20PHARMACOLOGY%20in%202018:%20updates%20and%20expansion%20to%20encompass%20the%20new%20guide%20to%20IMMUNOPHARMACOLOGY&author=SD%20Harding&author=JL%20Sharman&author=E%20Faccenda&author=C%20Southan&author=AJ%20Pawson&volume=46&issue=D1&publication_year=2018&pages=D1091-D1106&pmid=29149325&doi=10.1093/nar/gkx1121&)

13. Alexander SPH, Fabbro D, Kelly E, Marrion NV, Peters JA, Faccenda E, et al The Concise Guide to PHARMACOLOGY 2017/18: Enzymes. Br J Pharmacol 2017; 174 (Suppl. 1): S272–S359.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/bph.13877) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5650666/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29055034/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Br%20J%20Pharmacol&title=The%20Concise%20Guide%20to%20PHARMACOLOGY%202017/18:%20Enzymes&author=SPH%20Alexander&author=D%20Fabbro&author=E%20Kelly&author=NV%20Marrion&author=JA%20Peters&volume=174&issue=Suppl.%201&publication_year=2017&pages=S272-S359&pmid=29055034&doi=10.1111/bph.13877&)

14. Fernández Salazar JM, Remacha Sevilla A, del Río Conde E, Baiget Bastús M. Distribution of the A(TA)7TAA genotype associated with Gilbert syndrome in the Spanish population. Med Clin (Barc) 2000; 115: 540–541.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11141380/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Med%20Clin%20(Barc)&title=Distribution%20of%20the%20A(TA)7TAA%20genotype%20associated%20with%20Gilbert%20syndrome%20in%20the%20Spanish%20population&author=JM%20Fern%C3%A1ndez%20Salazar&author=A%20Remacha%20Sevilla&author=E%20del%20R%C3%ADo%20Conde&author=M%20Baiget%20Bast%C3%BAs&volume=115&publication_year=2000&pages=540-541&pmid=11141380&)

15. Dean L. Irinotecan therapy and UGT1A1 genotype. Medical Genetics Summaries. National Center for Biotechnology Information (US); 2012.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28520360/)

16. Rouits E, Charasson V, Pétain A, Boisdron‐Celle M, Delord J‐P, Fonck M, et al Pharmacokinetic and pharmacogenetic determinants of the activity and toxicity of irinotecan in metastatic colorectal cancer patients. Br J Cancer 2008; 99: 1239–1245.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bjc.6604673) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2570505/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18797458/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Br%20J%20Cancer&title=Pharmacokinetic%20and%20pharmacogenetic%20determinants%20of%20the%20activity%20and%20toxicity%20of%20irinotecan%20in%20metastatic%20colorectal%20cancer%20patients&author=E%20Rouits&author=V%20Charasson&author=A%20P%C3%A9tain&author=M%20Boisdron%E2%80%90Celle&author=J%E2%80%90P%20Delord&volume=99&publication_year=2008&pages=1239-1245&pmid=18797458&doi=10.1038/sj.bjc.6604673&)

17. van der Bol JM, Mathijssen RHJ, Creemers G‐JM, Planting AST, Loos WJ, Wiemer EAC, et al A CYP3A4 phenotype‐based dosing algorithm for individualized treatment of irinotecan. Clin Cancer Res 2010; 16: 736–742.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-1526) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20068078/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Cancer%20Res&title=A%20CYP3A4%20phenotype%E2%80%90based%20dosing%20algorithm%20for%20individualized%20treatment%20of%20irinotecan&author=JM%20van%20der%20Bol&author=RHJ%20Mathijssen&author=G%E2%80%90JM%20Creemers&author=AST%20Planting&author=WJ%20Loos&volume=16&publication_year=2010&pages=736-742&pmid=20068078&doi=10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-1526&)

18. Makihara K, Nakamura S, Miyagi K, Ueno H, Nakata I. Clarithromycin co‐administration does not increase irinotecan (CPT‐11) toxicity in colorectal cancer patients. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2017; 80: 527–533.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00280-017-3388-4) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28711984/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Chemother%20Pharmacol&title=Clarithromycin%20co%E2%80%90administration%20does%20not%20increase%20irinotecan%20(CPT%E2%80%9011)%20toxicity%20in%20colorectal%20cancer%20patients&author=K%20Makihara&author=S%20Nakamura&author=K%20Miyagi&author=H%20Ueno&author=I%20Nakata&volume=80&publication_year=2017&pages=527-533&pmid=28711984&doi=10.1007/s00280-017-3388-4&)

19. Riera P, Apellániz MV, Salazar J. Relevancia de la variante CYP3A4*20 como predictor de neuropatía inducida por paclitaxel en población española. Med Clin (Barc) 2018; 150: 163–164.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medcli.2017.09.004) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29054579/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Med%20Clin%20(Barc)&title=Relevancia%20de%20la%20variante%20CYP3A4*20%20como%20predictor%20de%20neuropat%C3%ADa%20inducida%20por%20paclitaxel%20en%20poblaci%C3%B3n%20espa%C3%B1ola&author=P%20Riera&author=MV%20Apell%C3%A1niz&author=J%20Salazar&volume=150&publication_year=2018&pages=163-164&pmid=29054579&doi=10.1016/j.medcli.2017.09.004&)
