# Significant Association of DRD2 Enhancer Variant rs12364283 with Heroin Addiction in a Pakistani Population

## Metadata
**Authors:** SHAGUFTA JABEEN, JULIA K PINSONNEAULT, WOLFGANG SADEE, SUNG-HA LEE, MUHAMMAD MOBEEN ZAFAR, MUHAMMAD SAQLAIN, GHAZALA KAUKAB RAJA
**Journal:** Annals of human genetics
**Date:** 2019 Apr 26
**DOI:** [10.1111/ahg.12322](https://doi.org/10.1111/ahg.12322)
**PMID:** 31025317
**PMCID:** PMC6699898
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6699898/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6699898/pdf/nihms-1023757.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6699898/pdf/nihms-1023757.pdf)

## Abstract

The dopamine D2 receptor encoded by DRD2 has been implicated in multiple psychiatric disorders, mediated at least in part by two intronic variants affecting mRNA splicing, rs1076560 and rs2283265, and a less frequent enhancer variant, rs12364283, which increases DRD2 mRNA expression. This study tests whether these functionally validated variants confer susceptibility towards heroin addiction in a Pakistani population. A total of 540 heroin addicts and 467 healthy controls were genotyped, basic allele and genotype tests were performed. Neither rs1076560 nor rs2283265 significantly associated with heroin addiction. The enhancer rs12364283 occurs more frequently in heroin-dependent cases than controls (MAF 13% versus 7%, respectively), revealing significant association with heroin addiction (p=3.0E-06, OR 2.1). This study identifies rs12364283 of DRD2 as a potential risk factor for heroin addiction in the Pakistani study population. This enhancer variant had previously been shown to increase DRD2 mRNA expression (Zhang et al. 2007), a possible factor in increased vulnerability to heroin addiction. Further studies are needed to validate this association of rs12364283.

Keywords: Addiction, DRD2, Enhancer Variant, Genetics, Opioids

## INTRODUCTION

Clinically, opioid drug addiction is a heterogeneous disorder with highest heritability for heroin dependence compared to other drugs of abuse ([Tsuang et al., 1996](#R12), [Tsuang et al., 1998](#R13)). To gain further insight into possible causes, diagnosis, treatment and primary prevention of heroin addiction, knowledge of the key genetic factors is essential ([Tsuang et al., 1996](#R12), [Tsuang et al., 1998](#R13)). Clinical benefits of opioid analgesics are limited by substantial individual variation in response, a high rate (up to 66%) of adverse events, and addiction liability. Family based linkage studies and association studies have identified a number of genetic variants associated with heroin addiction or combined drug addiction ([Xu et al., 2004](#R14), Kreek et al., 2005).

Genetic variants in dopamine receptor D2 (*DRD2* 11q23.2) play a key role in signaling pathways linked to neuroadaptive changes, and are therefore prime candidates for genetic studies ([Levran et al., 2008](#R6)). GWAS results have implicated various *DRD2* variants in multiple psychiatric disorders ([Kaalund et al., 2014](#R5)); however, the identified SNPs may not directly represent causative variants. A previous study had identified two intronic variants affecting mRNA splicing, rs1076560 and rs2283265, leading to altered expression of the long and short isoforms of the D2 receptor ([Zhang et al., 2007](#R15)), later shown also to affect cocaine abuse related deaths ([Moyer et al., 2011](#R8)) and numerous other traits. In addition, an enhancer variant in *DRD2*, rs12364283 (A>G), located 844bp upstream of the transcription start site has been shown to affect the expression of *DRD2* mRNA in the brain. The minor *G* allele (gain-of-function, penetrant allele) of rs12364283 SNP is associated with enhanced *DRD2* expression compared to the major *A* allele ([Zhang et al., 2007](#R15)). Enhancer variants are reported to affect transcription and thereby potential susceptibility to common diseases ([Corradin and Scacheri, 2014](#R1)). rs12364283 has been found associated with behavioral responses like impulsivity, inhibition ([Hamidovic et al., 2009](#R4)) and avoidance in decision making ([Frank and Hutchison., 2009](#R3)). However, rs12364283 has been less well studied, possibly owing to its lower allele frequency (MAF ~5%) than the splicing variants.

Because disease associated genetic variants may differ in frequency and linkage disequilibrium (LD) patterns among different populations, functional variants may have different impact in different ethnic groups ([Lohmueller et al., 2006](#R7)). Drawing on previous molecular genetics studies, the present case-control association study was designed to assess the frequency of rs1076560, rs2283265, and rs12364283 *DRD2* variants and their potential effect on risk of heroin addiction in Pakistanis. The Pakistani population cohort lacks prior studies on genetic susceptibility to heroin addiction, with unknown genotype distributions in the *DRD2* candidate gene.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

Heroin addicts (positive for opioid urine test and being on daily multiple uses of heroin for at least a year) were recruited from drug rehabilitation centers/clinics located in Rawalpindi, Islamabad, and Peshawar Pakistan. The exclusion criterion followed for controls was: a) one or more instances of drinking to intoxication, or any illicit drug use, in preceding 30 days. b) Past history of alcohol drinking to intoxication, or illicit drug use, more than twice a week and six consecutive months. c) Cannabis use for more than 12 days in prior 30 days or past use for more than twice a week for more than 4 years ([Levran et al., 2008](#R6)). However healthy controls included in this study had no history of drug abuse or mental disorder.

All subjects completed a detailed questionnaire while ethnicity was self-reported (Punjabi/Pashtuns/Kashmiris). The study had been approved by the Ethics Committee for the use of human subjects, Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University Rawalpindi, Pakistan. An informed consent was obtained from all study subjects before sampling.

Venous blood (5 ml) was collected in EDTA vacutainers, and DNA extracted using a standard phenol-chloroform protocol of (Sambrook et al., 1982). A total of 1007 male subjects included in the study were genotyped for the *DRD2* intronic variants rs1076560 and rs2283265, and a less frequent enhancer variant, rs12364283. Genotyping for rs1076560 and rs2283265 SNPs of *DRD2* was performed by PCR-RFLP using a DNA Analyzer 3730 (Applied Biosystems (ABI, Life Technologies). For RFLPs, a 100–300 base pair region surrounding each SNP was amplified via PCR using one fluorescently labeled primer and one unlabeled primer ([Zhang et al., 2007](#R15)). The resulting amplicons were digested overnight with a restriction endonuclease that selectively distinguishes between the fluorescently labeled fragments of two alleles. obtained from these methods were analyzed on AB 3730 capillary electrophoresis instrument ([Papp et al., 2003](#R10)). A modified allele-specific PCR method ([Papp et al., 2003](#R10), [Zhang et al., 2007](#R15)) was used for genotyping of rs12364283 *A>G* variant of *DRD2*. The minor allele primer was tagged with a GC tail for better resolution of melting curves on a ABI PRISM® (7000 Sequence Detection System) instrument:

Forward: wt F, 5’_AAgTGTCCTCAGTTTGCgAGA_3’

GC-tagged forward: gcF, 5’_GCCCGGCGCGCGCCCTGTCCTCAGTTTGCCTGG_3’

Reverse: 5’_CAGCACCTGTTTAAGCCTCAGT_3’

### Statistical Analysis

The allelic and genotypic distribution both in cases and controls were calculated. Genotypes were checked for deviation from Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium (HWE). Both basic allele tests (with additive, dominant and recessive allele models) and a genotype test were performed and association with heroin dependence was determined using *χ*^2^ test. Linkage disequilibrium (LD) among three studied *DRD2* SNPs was calculated and presented as D´ and r^2^. The Helix Tree (Golden Helix) (50) software package was used for statistical analysis.

## RESULTS

A comparison of the MAFs of all studied SNPs in major world populations and Pakistani population is given in the [Table 1](#T1) showing that the local Pakistani population shares similar allele frequencies as reported for SAS populations. The MAF of *DRD2* enhancer variant rs12364283 in the controls (0.07) was in the similar range for EUR population (0.08) but was lower compared to total SAS population (0.12). rs12364283 had a higher MAF (0.13) in cases as compared to controls.

### Table 1.

| SNP ID | SNPLocationon Gene | AllelesMajor/Minor | Global Populations |  |  |  |  | Current Study Population |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| EAS(n=1008) | EUR(n=1006) | AFR(n=1322) | AMR(n=694) | SAS(n=978) | Controls(n=467) | Cases(n=540) | TotalPopulation(n=1007) |  |  |  |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| rs1076560 | Intron 6 | C/A | 0.42 | 0.15 | 0.08 | 0.27 | 0.29 | 0.24 | 0.21 | 0.22 |
| rs2283265 | Intron 5 | G/T | 0.41 | 0.15 | 0.08 | 0.27 | 0.29 | 0.23 | 0.24 | 0.23 |
| rs12364283 | 5’Up | A/G | 0.004 | 0.08 | 0.01 | 0.04 | 0.12 | 0.07 | 0.13 | 0.10 |

Table 1 Caption: Minor Allele Frequency of Selected DRD2 Gene Variants (Previously Associated with Heroin Addiction in Human Subjects) in World Populations and Pakistani Study Population

Since study subjects belong to different ethnic groups, MAFs among Punjabis, Pashtuns, and Kashmiris are listed separately in [Table 2](#T2). There are some notable differences in the MAF among ethnic groups, in particular, *DRD2* rs12364283 differed between Punjabis (mean MAF 0.07), Pashtuns (0.06), and Kashmiris (0.13) with the highest MAF. As in the full study population, the enhancer SNP rs12364283 also displayed significantly higher MAF in each of the three ethnic groups; Punjabis (0.13 in cases, 0.07 in controls), Pashtuns (0.16 in cases, 0.06 in controls), and Kashmiris (0.18 in cases, 0.13 in controls) ([Table 2](#T2)). The MAFs of the other two *DRD2* SNPs, rs1076560 and rs2283265, also differed between Punjabis, Pashtuns and Kashmiris (0.26, 0.15, 0.15 and 0.26, 0.16, 0.19 respectively). Allele frequencies estimated for Kashmiris were calculated from a small population, and therefore, may not fully represent MAF for this sub-population. Therefore, we analyzed association with heroin dependence for the entire cohort combined, even while MAF values differed between the ethnic groups.

### Table 2.

| Markers | Minor Allele Frequencies within Ethnic Groups |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Punjabis (n=678) |  |  | Pashtuns (n=194) |  |  | Kashmiris (n=61) |  |  |  |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| MAFTotal | Cases(n=334) | Controls(n=344) | MAFTotal | Cases(n=141) | Controls(n=53) | MAFTotal | Cases(n=33) | Controls(n=28) |  |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| rs1076560 | 0.23 | 0.21 | 0.26 | 0.17 | 0.18 | 0.15 | 0.20 | 0.26 | 0.15 |
| rs2283265 | 0.24 | 0.23 | 0.26 | 0.17 | 0.18 | 0.16 | 0.24 | 0.30 | 0.19 |
| rs12364283 | 0.09 | 0.13 | 0.07 | 0.12 | 0.16 | 0.06 | 0.15 | 0.18 | 0.13 |

Table 2 Caption: Minor Allele Frequencies of Selected DRD2 Gene Variants in Cases and Controls of Three Ethnic Groups.

The association for all *DRD2* polymorphisms with heroin addiction are presented in [Table 3](#T3), along with genotype data. Only the enhancer SNP rs12364283 displayed significantly higher minor allele frequency (0.13) in cases as compared to controls (0.07), (p=3.0E-6). Moreover the homozygous minor allele carriers are four times more frequent in cases than controls for rs12364283 (20 vs 4). The basic allele test gave the lowest p value (p= 3.0E-06, OR=2.1 with 95% CI=1.5–2.9) showing significant association of the minor allele of rs12364283 with increasing risk of heroin dependence. The genotypes were in HWE for the control group (p=0.17), but deviated significantly in the cases (p=2.9e-5), consistent with the enrichment of the minor allele in the cases. While associations of neither rs1076560 nor rs2283265 were significant with heroin addiction (p=0.16, OR=0.86 with 95% C.I=0.69–1.06; and p=0.46, OR=0.92 with 95% C.I=0.75–1.14, respectively). The genotypes of both SNPs, were in HWE for the control group (p=0.189 for both SNPs) and for the cases (p=0.25 and p=0.118). The LD scores for all three variants are presented in [Table 4](#T4). Per results rs1076560 and rs2283265 are in tight LD between them (D´=0.947) while rs12364283 is in low LD with both SNPs (rs1076560 D´=0.059 and rs2283265 D´=0.02).

### Table 3:

|   |   | Genotypes |  |  | Basic Allele Test and Genotype Test p-value |  |  |  |   |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   |   |   |  |  |  |  |  |  |   |
| Markers | Population | DD | Dd | dd | BasicAllele Testp-value | BasicAllele TestCorrectedp-value | GenotypeTestp-value | GenotypeTestCorrectedp-value | OR (95% CI) |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| rs1076560 | Cases | 321 | 161 | 27 | 0.16 | 0.48 | 0.08 | 0.24 | 0.86 (0.69–1.06) |
| Controls | 251 | 170 | 20 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| rs2283265 | Cases | 321 | 171 | 33 | 0.46 | 1.00 | 0.10 | 0.30 | 0.92 (0.75–1.14) |
| Controls | 245 | 168 | 20 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| rs12364283 | Cases | 386 | 95 | 20 | 2.96E-06 | 8.89E-06 | 7.23E-05 | 0.0002 | 2.1 (1.5–2.9) |
| Controls | 390 | 54 | 4 |  |  |  |  |  |  |

Table 3 Caption: Genetic Association Analysis of Selected DRD2 Gene Variants with Heroin Addiction in Pakistani Study Population

### Table 4.

| rs_number | rs1076560 | rs2283265 | rs12364283 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   |  |  |  |
| rs1076560 | 1.0/1.0 | 1.0/0.947 | 0.059/0 |
| rs2283265 | 1.0/0.947 | 1.0/1.0 | 0.02/0 |
| rs12364283 | 0.059/0 | 0.02/0 | 1.0/1.0 |

Table 4 Caption: Linkage Disequilibrium Analysis of Selected DRD2 Gene Variants

## DISCUSSION

This study is the first conducted in a Pakistani cohort consisting of heroin addicts and a normal control group. The initial focus was to compare allele frequencies in opioid addiction candidate genes between ethnicities across the world and the Pakistani population. A primary goal of the study was to identify candidate variants that contribute to heroin addiction vulnerability in the Pakistani population. Previous evidence has linked anomalous subcortical dopamine D2 receptor (*DRD2*) signaling with drug addiction and other central nervous system disorders ([Seeman, 2006](#R11)). Our results implicate an enhancer SNP in *DRD2,* rs12364283, 844bp upstream of the transcription start site.

The *DRD2* rs12364283 variant had been shown to cause increased mRNA expression ([Zhang et al., 2007](#R15)), but because of lower MAF than other *DRD2* variants, its clinical associations with opioid addiction has yet to be studied. Owing to a higher MAF in study cohort (heroin addicts as total and ethnically separated), and a sufficient number of subjects, our study provided an opportunity to test its effect on heroin addiction. Indeed, rs12364283 is significantly associated with heroin dependence in the studied Pakistani population, with an approximately twofold odds ratio (OR 2.1, CI 1.5–2.9). This result must be replicated before the potential significance of rs12364283 in opioid addiction is confirmed. In support of a functional role of rs12364283, a study on Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), a pathologic response to severe stress and a common co-morbid disorder in drug use disorders, revealed an association between rs12364283 and pathophysiology of PTSD in amphetamine-dependent individuals ([Nelson et al., 2014](#R9)). Also, *DRD2* variants have been implicated in risk of opiate addiction, affecting the need for methadone substitution therapy and methadone dosage requirements ([Doehring et al., 2009](#R2)). In that study cohort, the minor rs12364283 allele was present with nearly twice the frequency in cases compared to control (10.1% versus 4.6%; OR 2.3 (1.0–5.3) ([Doehring et al., 2009](#R2)), similar to our findings, but this difference did not reach statistical significance (Bonferroni corrected) owing to a small number of subjects. Nevertheless, this result provides a first replication of the result reported here.

Previously, two intronic SNPs, rs2283265 and rs1076560, had been identified in high LD with each other ([Zhang et al., 2007](#R15)) which affect *DRD2* splicing and memory processing, as well as an association with risk of death as a result of cocaine abuse ([Moyer et al., 2011](#R8)). However, both of these SNPs failed to show significant association with risk of heroin addiction; moreover, a haplotype analysis indicates that rs12364283 alone largely accounts for the association (data not shown). rs12364283 had been shown to increase *DRD2* expression ([Zhang et al., 2007](#R15)). A confounding factor, ethnic admixture in cases and controls could have affected the results, but similar trends are observed in each sub-population. The rs12364283 *DRD2* enhancer SNP may increase vulnerability to heroin addiction and should be considered in future association studies involving disorders characterized by dopaminergic dysfunction.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We are thankful to drug rehabilitation centers and hospitals, support and advice from members of the College of Medicine Center for Pharmacogenomics (Audrey Papp, Leslie Newman, Roshan Mascarenhas, Danxin Wang and Ryan Smith), The Ohio State University, USA.

Funding was provided by Indigenous Scholarship [106–1960-BM6–056], Higher Education Commission, Pakistan and National Institutes of Health (NIH) research grant U01 GM092655.

## Footnotes

## References

1. Corradin O & Scacheri PC 2014. Enhancer variants: evaluating functions in common disease. Genome medicine 6: 85.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13073-014-0085-3) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4254432/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25473424/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20medicine&title=Enhancer%20variants:%20evaluating%20functions%20in%20common%20disease&author=O%20Corradin&author=PC%20Scacheri&volume=6&publication_year=2014&pages=85&pmid=25473424&doi=10.1186/s13073-014-0085-3&)

2. Doehring A, Von Hentig N, Graff J, Salamat S, Schmidt M, Geisslinger G, Harder S & Lötsch J 2009. Genetic variants altering dopamine D2 receptor expression or function modulate the risk of opiate addiction and the dosage requirements of methadone substitution. Pharmacogenetics and genomics 19: 407–414.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0b013e328320a3fd) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19373123/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenetics%20and%20genomics&title=Genetic%20variants%20altering%20dopamine%20D2%20receptor%20expression%20or%20function%20modulate%20the%20risk%20of%20opiate%20addiction%20and%20the%20dosage%20requirements%20of%20methadone%20substitution&author=A%20Doehring&author=N%20Von%20Hentig&author=J%20Graff&author=S%20Salamat&author=M%20Schmidt&volume=19&publication_year=2009&pages=407-414&pmid=19373123&doi=10.1097/FPC.0b013e328320a3fd&)

3. Frank MJ & Hutchison K 2009. Genetic contributions to avoidance-based decisions: striatal D2 receptor polymorphisms. Neuroscience 164(1):131–40.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.04.048) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2760598/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19393722/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuroscience&title=Genetic%20contributions%20to%20avoidance-based%20decisions:%20striatal%20D2%20receptor%20polymorphisms&author=MJ%20Frank&author=K%20Hutchison&volume=164&issue=1&publication_year=2009&pages=131-40&pmid=19393722&doi=10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.04.048&)

4. Hamidovic A, Dlugos A, Skol A, Palmer AA & de Wit H 2009. Evaluation of genetic variability in the dopamine receptor D2 in relation to behavioral inhibition and impulsivity/sensation seeking: an exploratory study with d-amphetamine in healthy participants. Experimental Clinical Psychopharmacology 17(6):374–83.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1037/a0017840) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2879583/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19968402/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Experimental%20Clinical%20Psychopharmacology&title=Evaluation%20of%20genetic%20variability%20in%20the%20dopamine%20receptor%20D2%20in%20relation%20to%20behavioral%20inhibition%20and%20impulsivity/sensation%20seeking:%20an%20exploratory%20study%20with%20d-amphetamine%20in%20healthy%20participants&author=A%20Hamidovic&author=A%20Dlugos&author=A%20Skol&author=AA%20Palmer&author=H%20de%20Wit&volume=17&issue=6&publication_year=2009&pages=374-83&pmid=19968402&doi=10.1037/a0017840&)

5. Kaalund S, Newburn E, Ye T, Tao R, Li C, Deep-Soboslay A, Herman M, Hyde T, Weinberger D & Lipska B 2014. Contrasting changes in DRD1 and DRD2 splice variant expression in schizophrenia and affective disorders, and associations with SNPs in postmortem brain. Molecular psychiatry 19: 1258.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2013.165) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24322206/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Molecular%20psychiatry&title=Contrasting%20changes%20in%20DRD1%20and%20DRD2%20splice%20variant%20expression%20in%20schizophrenia%20and%20affective%20disorders,%20and%20associations%20with%20SNPs%20in%20postmortem%20brain&author=S%20Kaalund&author=E%20Newburn&author=T%20Ye&author=R%20Tao&author=C%20Li&volume=19&publication_year=2014&pages=1258&pmid=24322206&doi=10.1038/mp.2013.165&)

6. Levran O, Londono D, O’hara K, Nielsen D, Peles E, Rotrosen J, Casadonte P, Linzy S, Randesi M & Ott J 2008. Genetic susceptibility to heroin addiction: a candidate gene association study. Genes, Brain and Behavior 7: 720–729.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1601-183X.2008.00410.x) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2885890/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18518925/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genes,%20Brain%20and%20Behavior&title=Genetic%20susceptibility%20to%20heroin%20addiction:%20a%20candidate%20gene%20association%20study&author=O%20Levran&author=D%20Londono&author=K%20O%E2%80%99hara&author=D%20Nielsen&author=E%20Peles&volume=7&publication_year=2008&pages=720-729&pmid=18518925&doi=10.1111/j.1601-183X.2008.00410.x&)

7. Lohmueller KE, Mauney MM, Reich D & Braverman JM 2006. Variants associated with common disease are not unusually differentiated in frequency across populations. The American Journal of Human Genetics 78: 130–136.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/499287) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1380210/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16385456/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=The%20American%20Journal%20of%20Human%20Genetics&title=Variants%20associated%20with%20common%20disease%20are%20not%20unusually%20differentiated%20in%20frequency%20across%20populations&author=KE%20Lohmueller&author=MM%20Mauney&author=D%20Reich&author=JM%20Braverman&volume=78&publication_year=2006&pages=130-136&pmid=16385456&doi=10.1086/499287&)

8. Moyer RA, Wang D, Papp AC, Smith RM, Duque L, Mash DC & Sadee W 2011. Intronic polymorphisms affecting alternative splicing of human dopamine D2 receptor are associated with cocaine abuse. Neuropsychopharmacology 36: 753–762.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2010.208) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3055737/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21150907/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuropsychopharmacology&title=Intronic%20polymorphisms%20affecting%20alternative%20splicing%20of%20human%20dopamine%20D2%20receptor%20are%20associated%20with%20cocaine%20abuse&author=RA%20Moyer&author=D%20Wang&author=AC%20Papp&author=RM%20Smith&author=L%20Duque&volume=36&publication_year=2011&pages=753-762&pmid=21150907&doi=10.1038/npp.2010.208&)

9. Nelson E C, Heath AC, Lynskey MT, Agrawal A, Henders AK, Bowdler LM, Todorov AA, Madden PA, Moore E & Degenhardt L 2014. PTSD risk associated with a functional DRD2 polymorphism in heroin‐dependent cases and controls is limited to amphetamine‐dependent individuals. Addiction biology 19: 700–707.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/adb.12062) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3883923/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23647975/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Addiction%20biology&title=PTSD%20risk%20associated%20with%20a%20functional%20DRD2%20polymorphism%20in%20heroin%E2%80%90dependent%20cases%20and%20controls%20is%20limited%20to%20amphetamine%E2%80%90dependent%20individuals&author=C%20Nelson%20E&author=AC%20Heath&author=MT%20Lynskey&author=A%20Agrawal&author=AK%20Henders&volume=19&publication_year=2014&pages=700-707&pmid=23647975&doi=10.1111/adb.12062&)

10. Papp AC, Pinsonneault JK, Cooke G & Sadée W 2003. Single nucleotide polymorphism genotyping using allele-specific PCR and fluorescence melting curves. Biotechniques 34: 1068–1073.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2144/03345dd03) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12765033/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biotechniques&title=Single%20nucleotide%20polymorphism%20genotyping%20using%20allele-specific%20PCR%20and%20fluorescence%20melting%20curves&author=AC%20Papp&author=JK%20Pinsonneault&author=G%20Cooke&author=W%20Sad%C3%A9e&volume=34&publication_year=2003&pages=1068-1073&pmid=12765033&doi=10.2144/03345dd03&)

11. Seeman P 2006. Targeting the dopamine D2 receptor in schizophrenia. Expert opinion on therapeutic targets 10: 515–531.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1517/14728222.10.4.515) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16848689/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Expert%20opinion%20on%20therapeutic%20targets&title=Targeting%20the%20dopamine%20D2%20receptor%20in%20schizophrenia&author=P%20Seeman&volume=10&publication_year=2006&pages=515-531&pmid=16848689&doi=10.1517/14728222.10.4.515&)

12. Tsuang MT, Lyons MJ, Eisen SA, Goldberg J, True W, Lin N, Meyer JM, Toomey R, Faraone SV & Eaves L 1996. Genetic influences on DSM‐III‐R drug abuse and dependence: A study of 3,372 twin pairs. American journal of medical genetics 67: 473–477.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19960920)67:5<473::AID-AJMG6>3.0.CO;2-L) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8886164/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=American%20journal%20of%20medical%20genetics&title=Genetic%20influences%20on%20DSM%E2%80%90III%E2%80%90R%20drug%20abuse%20and%20dependence:%20A%20study%20of%203,372%20twin%20pairs&author=MT%20Tsuang&author=MJ%20Lyons&author=SA%20Eisen&author=J%20Goldberg&author=W%20True&volume=67&publication_year=1996&pages=473-477&pmid=8886164&doi=10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19960920)67:5<473::AID-AJMG6>3.0.CO;2-L&)

13. Tsuang MT, Lyons MJ, Meyer JM, Doyle T, Eisen SA, Goldberg J, True W, Lin N, Toomey R & Eaves L 1998. Co-occurrence of abuse of different drugs in men: the role of drug-specific and shared vulnerabilities. Archives of general psychiatry 55: 967–972.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.55.11.967) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9819064/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Archives%20of%20general%20psychiatry&title=Co-occurrence%20of%20abuse%20of%20different%20drugs%20in%20men:%20the%20role%20of%20drug-specific%20and%20shared%20vulnerabilities&author=MT%20Tsuang&author=MJ%20Lyons&author=JM%20Meyer&author=T%20Doyle&author=SA%20Eisen&volume=55&publication_year=1998&pages=967-972&pmid=9819064&doi=10.1001/archpsyc.55.11.967&)

14. Xu K, Lichtermann D, Lipsky RH, Franke P, Liu X, Hu Y, Cao L, Schwab SG, Wildenauer DB & Bau CH 2004. Association of specific haplotypes of D2 dopamine receptorgene with vulnerability to heroin dependence in 2 distinct populations. Archives of general psychiatry 61: 597–606.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.61.6.597) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15184239/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Archives%20of%20general%20psychiatry&title=Association%20of%20specific%20haplotypes%20of%20D2%20dopamine%20receptorgene%20with%20vulnerability%20to%20heroin%20dependence%20in%202%20distinct%20populations&author=K%20Xu&author=D%20Lichtermann&author=RH%20Lipsky&author=P%20Franke&author=X%20Liu&volume=61&publication_year=2004&pages=597-606&pmid=15184239&doi=10.1001/archpsyc.61.6.597&)

15. Zhang Y, Bertolino A, Fazio L, Blasi G, Rampino A, Romano R, Lee M-L T, Xiao T, Papp A & Wang D 2007. Polymorphisms in human dopamine D2 receptor gene affect gene expression, splicing, and neuronal activity during working memory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104: 20552–20557.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0707106104) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2154469/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18077373/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proceedings%20of%20the%20National%20Academy%20of%20Sciences&title=Polymorphisms%20in%20human%20dopamine%20D2%20receptor%20gene%20affect%20gene%20expression,%20splicing,%20and%20neuronal%20activity%20during%20working%20memory&author=Y%20Zhang&author=A%20Bertolino&author=L%20Fazio&author=G%20Blasi&author=A%20Rampino&volume=104&publication_year=2007&pages=20552-20557&pmid=18077373&doi=10.1073/pnas.0707106104&)
