# A common missense variant in NUDT15 confers susceptibility to thiopurine-induced leukopenia

## Metadata
**Authors:** Suk-Kyun Yang, Myunghee Hong, Jiwon Baek, Hyunchul Choi, Wanting Zhao, Yusun Jung, Talin Haritunians, Byong Duk Ye, Kyung-Jo Kim, Sang Hyoung Park, Soo-Kyung Park, Dong-Hoon Yang, Marla Dubinsky, Inchul Lee, Dermot P B McGovern, Jianjun Liu, Kyuyoung Song
**Journal:** Nature genetics
**Date:** 2014 Aug 10
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.3060](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3060)
**PMID:** 25108385
**PMCID:** PMC4999337
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4999337/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4999337/pdf/nihms810835.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4999337/pdf/nihms810835.pdf)

## Abstract

Thiopurine therapy, commonly used in autoimmune conditions, can be complicated by life-threatening leukopenia. This leukopenia is associated with genetic variation in TPMT (encoding thiopurine S-methyltransferase). Despite a lower frequency of TPMT mutations in Asians, the incidence of thiopurine-induced leukopenia is higher in Asians than in individuals of European descent. Here we performed an Immunochip-based 2-stage association study in 978 Korean subjects with Crohn’s disease treated with thiopurines. We identified a nonsynonymous SNP in NUDT15 (encoding p.Arg139Cys) that was strongly associated with thiopurine-induced early leukopenia (odds ratio (OR) = 35.6; Pcombined = 4.88 × 10−94). In Koreans, this variant demonstrated sensitivity and specificity of 89.4% and 93.2%, respectively, for thiopurine-induced early leukopenia (in comparison to 12.1% and 97.6% for TPMT variants). Although rare, this SNP was also strongly associated with thiopurine-induced leukopenia in subjects with inflammatory bowel disease of European descent (OR = 9.50; P = 4.64 × 10−4). Thus, NUDT15 is a pharmacogenetic determinant for thiopurine-induced leukopenia in diverse populations.

## ONLINE METHODS

### Study population

Of a total of 1,191 Korean Crohn’s disease cases who used thiopurines, 978 were included in the present study (for details, see [Supplementary Fig. 1](#SD1) and the [Supplementary Note](#SD1)). Of the 978 subjects, 66 experienced leukopenia within the first 8 weeks of thiopurine therapy (defined as cases with early leukopenia^15^), 280 experienced leukopenia after the first 8 weeks (defined as cases with late leukopenia^15^), and 632 did not experience leukopenia and had been treated with ≥1 mg/kg/d AZA for ≥8 weeks (defined as controls). To investigate whether the association was present in individuals of European descent, we used a US cohort recruited from the IBD Center at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. Further description of the characteristics of the study population is provided in the [Supplementary Note](#SD1). All participants provided written informed consent. The study was approved by the institutional review board of the Asan Medical Center.

### Use of thiopurines and assessment of leukopenia

Our clinical approach to prescribing thiopurines in Crohn’s disease is to start at a low dose of either AZA or 6-MP and to increase the medication dosage slowly over several months until the target weight-based dose is achieved. It is not our clinical practice to assess *TPMT* status before initiating thiopurine therapy. In this cohort, decisions regarding dose adjustment or discontinuation of thiopurine drugs due to adverse events were made by the physician responsible on a case-by-case basis. Details on the dosing schedule, monitoring of complete blood counts and assessment of leukopenia are provided in the [Supplementary Note](#SD1).

### SNP genotyping and association analysis

We used Immunochip data from 504 Crohn’s disease cases from a study that included Immunochip genotyping of 726 Crohn’s disease cases and 469 healthy controls (S.-K.Y., M.H., H.C., W.Z. & Y.J. *et al*., unpublished data). The remaining 222 Crohn’s disease cases were not included in the current study because they received either insufficient (*n* = 112) or no (*n* = 110) thiopurine therapy. Our discovery analysis was focused on early leukopenia, using the 33 cases with early leukopenia and 307 controls.

Genotyping with the Immunochip was performed at the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. The Immunochip includes 196,524 genetic variants in genetic susceptibility loci previously shown to confer risk for autoimmune or inflammatory diseases and other regions with suggestive evidence of association. SNP and sample quality control analyses were performed with the use of established procedures. Briefly, all SNPs on the X, Y and mitochondrial chromosomes, as well as copy number variation–related SNPs, were excluded. As a part of quality control, SNPs were excluded if they had a call rate lower than 90%, a minor allele frequency (MAF) of <0.01 and significant deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in controls (*P* < 2.5 × 10^−7^). Similarly, we removed all the samples with a genotyping rate less than 96% from further analysis. Only 95,405 SNPs were left for further quality control. We then examined the potential genetic relatedness of the 340 samples on the basis of pairwise identity by state using PLINK version 1.07 software (see URLs). Sample duplications and/or genetic relatedness were not found. Subsequently, we used PCA (principal-component analysis)-based methods to detect population outliers and stratification in the software package EIGENSTRAT 3.0 (see URLs)^18^. For PCA, all 340 samples (33 early leukopenia cases and 307 controls) were analyzed together with the 194 reference samples from the International HapMap Project, and no outliers were identified ([Supplementary Fig. 7](#SD1)). After quality control measures were implemented, a total of 95,405 SNPs in 340 samples were used in the association analysis.

For the test of replication, 10 selected SNPs were successfully genotyped using TaqMan SNP genotyping assays in an additional 33 early leukopenia cases and 325 clinically confirmed controls. The most significant signal was replicated in 280 late leukopenia cases and 632 controls from the discovery and replication samples. With a two-stage design, the current study had good power (78%) to detect a genetic risk variant with a population frequency of 5% and risk effect (OR) of 15 and great power (90%) to detect a risk variant with a population frequency of 5% and an OR of 20 or a population frequency of 10% and an OR of 15. We also determined *TPMT* genotypes (rs1142345) in all participants. Genotype data for the SNPs selected on the basis of imputation data were confirmed in the discovery samples. Genotype data for rs116855232 in the US cohort were generated using the Human Exome BeadChip (Illumina). Logistic regression was performed with adjustment for the top four principal components to control for potential confounding. Seventy-three cases and 1,115 controls with both Exome BeadChip and phenotype data were included in the analysis.

### Imputation

To improve the coverage of genetic variants, we imputed untyped genotypes in the discovery samples using the Asian reference panel (JPT and CHB) from the 1000 Genomes Project databases (February 2012 release) and IMPUTE version 2.0 (see URLs)^19^. Imputed genotypes with a genotype probability of <90%, as well as SNPs with an imputation certainty of <80% (based on information scores from imputation results), a MAF of <1% and a missing rate of >10% of genotypes, were eliminated from further analysis. A total of 436,011 imputed SNPs passed quality control and were combined with 95,405 genotyped SNPs for association analysis.

### Transfection with NUDT15 and apoptosis analysis

To investigate the functional role of the coding variant (p.Arg139Cys) of *NUDT15* in the thiopurine-induced cytotoxicity effect, we measured the sensitivity of cells to 6-MP after they were transfected with wild-type or mutant *NUDT15*. Expression plasmid encoding Myc-DDK–tagged NUDT15 (Origene) was modified to generate mutant *NUDT15* (Cys139) using site-directed mutagenesis (Cosmogenetech). An immortalized line of human T lymphocyte cells, Jurkat cells (American Type Culture Collection; mycoplasma free), were cultured in RPMI 1640 (Welgene) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% antibiotics. Cells were transfected with either wild-type (Arg139) or mutant (Cys139) *NUDT15* construct using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). After transfection, cells were allowed to recover at 37 °C in the presence of 5% CO_2_ for 24 h before treatment with 7.5 μM 6-MP (Sigma-Aldrich). The sensitivity of the cells to 7.5 μM 6-MP was measured by cell survival and apoptosis assays. To evaluate cell survival, cells were diluted with medium for a 4× dilution and with trypan blue viability stain for a 2× dilution. Viable cells were counted on a hemocytometer using a microscope at 100× magnification. A FITC Annexin V/Dead Cell Apoptosis kit (Invitrogen) was used for apoptosis assays. Cells were washed in PBS, resuspended (~1 × 10^6^ cells/ml) in 100 μl of 1× Annexin binding buffer (10 mM HEPES, 140 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM CaCl_2_, pH 7.4) and then incubated with 1 μl of propidium iodide (100 μg/ml; diluted in 1× Annexin binding buffer) and 5 μl of FITC Annexin V at room temperature for 15 min. We then added 400 μl of 1× Annexin binding buffer. Apoptosis after drug treatment was assessed by BD FACS Canto II (BD Biosciences) using Annexin V and propidium iodide staining. The data were analyzed by Student’s *t* test, and *P* < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

### Statistical analysis

All association analyses were performed via logistic regression with an additive model of inheritance using PLINK version 1.07 (see URLs). The quantile-quantile plot was generated using R version 2.13.1 (see URLs) to evaluate the overall significance of the discovery association analysis and the potential impact of population stratification. The impact of population stratification was also evaluated by calculating the genomic control inflation factor. The Manhattan plot of −log_10_ *P* values was generated using Haploview version 4.2 (see URLs). Replication analysis was performed by analyzing the follow-up samples separately and then performing a combined analysis of all cases and controls. Association analysis of the combined samples was performed using Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel stratification analysis. The Breslow-Day test was used to test for heterogeneity of the OR estimates between the discovery and validation samples. We tested the independence of the multiple associations observed within the *SUCLA2*-*NUDT15*-*MED4* region at 13q14 using conditional logistic regression analysis.

Categorical variables were expressed as proportions and compared using the *χ*^2^ test or Fisher’s test if the number of subjects in any cell of 2 × 2 table was five or less. Continuous variables were summarized as medians with ranges and compared using the Mann-Whitney *U* test or Kruskal-Wallis test. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS for Windows, version 18.0.

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgments

We would like to thank all participants who provided the DNA and clinical information necessary for this study. J.L. and W.Z. are supported by the Biomedical Research Council, the Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR; BMRC SPF2014/001), Singapore. D.P.B.M., T.H. and M.D. are supported by the US National Institutes of Health/National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (P01DK046763, U01DK062413, U01AI067068, R01HS021747), the European Union (IBD-BIOM 305479), the Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust (2011PG-MED004, 2014PG-IBD014) and internal funding from the F. Widjaja Foundation Inflammatory Bowel and Immunobiology Research Institute. This work was supported by a Mid-Career Researcher Program grant through NRF (National Research Foundation of Korea) to K.S. (2010-0015648, 2014R1A2A1A09005824) funded by the Ministry of Science, Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and Future Planning and by a Korean Health Technology R&D Project grant to S.-K.Y. (A120176) from the Ministry of Health and Welfare, the Republic of Korea.

## Footnotes

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Supplementary Materials

### Supplementary Materials

## References

1. Timmer A, McDonald JW, Tsoulis DJ, Macdonald JK. Azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine for maintenance of remission in ulcerative colitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;9:CD000478. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000478.pub3.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD000478.pub3) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22972046/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cochrane%20Database%20Syst%20Rev&title=Azathioprine%20and%206-mercaptopurine%20for%20maintenance%20of%20remission%20in%20ulcerative%20colitis&author=A%20Timmer&author=JW%20McDonald&author=DJ%20Tsoulis&author=JK%20Macdonald&volume=9&publication_year=2012&pages=CD000478&pmid=22972046&doi=10.1002/14651858.CD000478.pub3&)

2. Prefontaine E, Sutherland LR, Macdonald JK, Cepoiu M. Azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine for maintenance of remission in Crohn’s disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;1:CD000067. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000067.pub2.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD000067.pub2) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19160175/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cochrane%20Database%20Syst%20Rev&title=Azathioprine%20or%206-mercaptopurine%20for%20maintenance%20of%20remission%20in%20Crohn%E2%80%99s%20disease&author=E%20Prefontaine&author=LR%20Sutherland&author=JK%20Macdonald&author=M%20Cepoiu&volume=1&publication_year=2009&pages=CD000067&pmid=19160175&doi=10.1002/14651858.CD000067.pub2&)

3. Present DH, Meltzer SJ, Krumholz MP, Wolke A, Korelitz BI. 6-Mercaptopurine in the management of inflammatory bowel disease: short- and long-term toxicity. Ann Intern Med. 1989;111:641–649. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-111-8-641.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-111-8-641) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2802419/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann%20Intern%20Med&title=6-Mercaptopurine%20in%20the%20management%20of%20inflammatory%20bowel%20disease:%20short-%20and%20long-term%20toxicity&author=DH%20Present&author=SJ%20Meltzer&author=MP%20Krumholz&author=A%20Wolke&author=BI%20Korelitz&volume=111&publication_year=1989&pages=641-649&pmid=2802419&doi=10.7326/0003-4819-111-8-641&)

4. Connell WR, Kamm MA, Ritchie JK, Lennard-Jones JE. Bone marrow toxicity caused by azathioprine in inflammatory bowel disease: 27 years of experience. Gut. 1993;34:1081–1085. doi: 10.1136/gut.34.8.1081.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/gut.34.8.1081) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1374358/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8174958/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gut&title=Bone%20marrow%20toxicity%20caused%20by%20azathioprine%20in%20inflammatory%20bowel%20disease:%2027%20years%20of%20experience&author=WR%20Connell&author=MA%20Kamm&author=JK%20Ritchie&author=JE%20Lennard-Jones&volume=34&publication_year=1993&pages=1081-1085&pmid=8174958&doi=10.1136/gut.34.8.1081&)

5. Fraser AG, Orchard TR, Jewell DP. The efficacy of azathioprine for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease: a 30 year review. Gut. 2002;50:485–489. doi: 10.1136/gut.50.4.485.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/gut.50.4.485) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1773162/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11889067/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gut&title=The%20efficacy%20of%20azathioprine%20for%20the%20treatment%20of%20inflammatory%20bowel%20disease:%20a%2030%20year%20review&author=AG%20Fraser&author=TR%20Orchard&author=DP%20Jewell&volume=50&publication_year=2002&pages=485-489&pmid=11889067&doi=10.1136/gut.50.4.485&)

6. Colombel JF, et al. Genotypic analysis of thiopurine S-methyltransferase in patients with Crohn’s disease and severe myelosuppression during azathioprine therapy. Gastroenterology. 2000;118:1025–1030. doi: 10.1016/s0016-5085(00)70354-4.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0016-5085(00)70354-4) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10833476/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gastroenterology&title=Genotypic%20analysis%20of%20thiopurine%20S-methyltransferase%20in%20patients%20with%20Crohn%E2%80%99s%20disease%20and%20severe%20myelosuppression%20during%20azathioprine%20therapy&author=JF%20Colombel&volume=118&publication_year=2000&pages=1025-1030&pmid=10833476&doi=10.1016/s0016-5085(00)70354-4&)

7. Dewit O, et al. Limitations of extensive TPMT genotyping in the management of azathioprine-induced myelosuppression in IBD patients. Clin Biochem. 2011;44:1062–1066. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2011.06.079.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2011.06.079) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21723857/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Biochem&title=Limitations%20of%20extensive%20TPMT%20genotyping%20in%20the%20management%20of%20azathioprine-induced%20myelosuppression%20in%20IBD%20patients&author=O%20Dewit&volume=44&publication_year=2011&pages=1062-1066&pmid=21723857&doi=10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2011.06.079&)

8. Booth RA, et al. Assessment of thiopurine S-methyltransferase activity in patients prescribed thiopurines: a systematic review. Ann Intern Med. 2011;154:814–823. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-154-12-201106210-00009.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-154-12-201106210-00009) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21690596/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann%20Intern%20Med&title=Assessment%20of%20thiopurine%20S-methyltransferase%20activity%20in%20patients%20prescribed%20thiopurines:%20a%20systematic%20review&author=RA%20Booth&volume=154&publication_year=2011&pages=814-823&pmid=21690596&doi=10.7326/0003-4819-154-12-201106210-00009&)

9. Kumagai K, et al. Allelotype frequency of the thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) gene in Japanese. Pharmacogenetics. 2001;11:275–278. doi: 10.1097/00008571-200104000-00012.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/00008571-200104000-00012) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11337944/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenetics&title=Allelotype%20frequency%20of%20the%20thiopurine%20methyltransferase%20(TPMT)%20gene%20in%20Japanese&author=K%20Kumagai&volume=11&publication_year=2001&pages=275-278&pmid=11337944&doi=10.1097/00008571-200104000-00012&)

10. Cao Q, Zhu Q, Shang Y, Gao M, Si J. Thiopurine methyltransferase gene polymorphisms in Chinese patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Digestion. 2009;79:58–63. doi: 10.1159/000205268.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1159/000205268) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19252404/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Digestion&title=Thiopurine%20methyltransferase%20gene%20polymorphisms%20in%20Chinese%20patients%20with%20inflammatory%20bowel%20disease&author=Q%20Cao&author=Q%20Zhu&author=Y%20Shang&author=M%20Gao&author=J%20Si&volume=79&publication_year=2009&pages=58-63&pmid=19252404&doi=10.1159/000205268&)

11. Kim JH, et al. Influences of thiopurine methyltransferase genotype and activity on thiopurine-induced leukopenia in Korean patients with inflammatory bowel disease: a retrospective cohort study. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2010;44:e242–e248. doi: 10.1097/MCG.0b013e3181d6baf5.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/MCG.0b013e3181d6baf5) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20308917/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Gastroenterol&title=Influences%20of%20thiopurine%20methyltransferase%20genotype%20and%20activity%20on%20thiopurine-induced%20leukopenia%20in%20Korean%20patients%20with%20inflammatory%20bowel%20disease:%20a%20retrospective%20cohort%20study&author=JH%20Kim&volume=44&publication_year=2010&pages=e242-e248&pmid=20308917&doi=10.1097/MCG.0b013e3181d6baf5&)

12. Takatsu N, et al. Adverse reactions to azathioprine cannot be predicted by thiopurine S-methyltransferase genotype in Japanese patients with inflammatory bowel disease. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009;24:1258–1264. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1746.2009.05917.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-1746.2009.05917.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19682195/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Gastroenterol%20Hepatol&title=Adverse%20reactions%20to%20azathioprine%20cannot%20be%20predicted%20by%20thiopurine%20S-methyltransferase%20genotype%20in%20Japanese%20patients%20with%20inflammatory%20bowel%20disease&author=N%20Takatsu&volume=24&publication_year=2009&pages=1258-1264&pmid=19682195&doi=10.1111/j.1440-1746.2009.05917.x&)

13. Collie-Duguid ES, et al. The frequency and distribution of thiopurine methyltransferase alleles in Caucasian and Asian populations. Pharmacogenetics. 1999;9:37–42. doi: 10.1097/00008571-199902000-00006.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/00008571-199902000-00006) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10208641/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenetics&title=The%20frequency%20and%20distribution%20of%20thiopurine%20methyltransferase%20alleles%20in%20Caucasian%20and%20Asian%20populations&author=ES%20Collie-Duguid&volume=9&publication_year=1999&pages=37-42&pmid=10208641&doi=10.1097/00008571-199902000-00006&)

14. Lee HJ, et al. The safety and efficacy of azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine in the treatment of Korean patients with Crohn’s disease. Intest Res. 2009;7:22–31.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Intest%20Res&title=The%20safety%20and%20efficacy%20of%20azathioprine%20and%206-mercaptopurine%20in%20the%20treatment%20of%20Korean%20patients%20with%20Crohn%E2%80%99s%20disease&author=HJ%20Lee&volume=7&publication_year=2009&pages=22-31&)

15. Lewis JD, et al. Timing of myelosuppression during thiopurine therapy for inflammatory bowel disease: implications for monitoring recommendations. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009;7:1195–1201. doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2009.07.019.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2009.07.019) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4435979/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19631285/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Gastroenterol%20Hepatol&title=Timing%20of%20myelosuppression%20during%20thiopurine%20therapy%20for%20inflammatory%20bowel%20disease:%20implications%20for%20monitoring%20recommendations&author=JD%20Lewis&volume=7&publication_year=2009&pages=1195-1201&pmid=19631285&doi=10.1016/j.cgh.2009.07.019&)

16. Fangbin Z, et al. Should thiopurine methyltransferase genotypes and phenotypes be measured before thiopurine therapy in patients with inflammatory bowel disease? Ther Drug Monit. 2012;34:695–701. doi: 10.1097/FTD.0b013e3182731925.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/FTD.0b013e3182731925) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23149442/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ther%20Drug%20Monit&title=Should%20thiopurine%20methyltransferase%20genotypes%20and%20phenotypes%20be%20measured%20before%20thiopurine%20therapy%20in%20patients%20with%20inflammatory%20bowel%20disease?&author=Z%20Fangbin&volume=34&publication_year=2012&pages=695-701&pmid=23149442&doi=10.1097/FTD.0b013e3182731925&)

17. Takagi Y, et al. Human MTH3 (NUDT18) protein hydrolyzes oxidized forms of guanosine and deoxyguanosine diphosphates: comparison with MTH1 and MTH2. J Biol Chem. 2012;287:21541–21549. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.363010.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112.363010) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3375575/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22556419/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Biol%20Chem&title=Human%20MTH3%20(NUDT18)%20protein%20hydrolyzes%20oxidized%20forms%20of%20guanosine%20and%20deoxyguanosine%20diphosphates:%20comparison%20with%20MTH1%20and%20MTH2&author=Y%20Takagi&volume=287&publication_year=2012&pages=21541-21549&pmid=22556419&doi=10.1074/jbc.M112.363010&)

18. Price AL, et al. Principal components analysis corrects for stratification in genome-wide association studies. Nat Genet. 2006;38:904–909. doi: 10.1038/ng1847.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1847) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16862161/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Genet&title=Principal%20components%20analysis%20corrects%20for%20stratification%20in%20genome-wide%20association%20studies&author=AL%20Price&volume=38&publication_year=2006&pages=904-909&pmid=16862161&doi=10.1038/ng1847&)

19. Howie BN, Donnelly P, Marchini J. A flexible and accurate genotype imputation method for the next generation of genome-wide association studies. PLoS Genet. 2009;5:e1000529. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000529.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000529) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2689936/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19543373/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Genet&title=A%20flexible%20and%20accurate%20genotype%20imputation%20method%20for%20the%20next%20generation%20of%20genome-wide%20association%20studies&author=BN%20Howie&author=P%20Donnelly&author=J%20Marchini&volume=5&publication_year=2009&pages=e1000529&pmid=19543373&doi=10.1371/journal.pgen.1000529&)
