# Further evidence for association between genetic variants in the cannabinoid receptor 1 (CNR1) gene and cocaine dependence: Confirmation in an independent sample and meta-analysis

## Metadata
**Authors:** Toni-Kim Clarke, Paul J Bloch, Lisa M Ambrose-Lanci, Glenn A Doyle, Thomas N Ferraro, Wade H Berrettini, Kyle M Kampman, Charles A Dackis, Helen M Pettinati, Charles P O’Brien, David W Oslin, Falk W Lohoff
**Journal:** Addiction biology
**Date:** 2011 Jul 25
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1369-1600.2011.00346.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1369-1600.2011.00346.x)
**PMID:** 21790903
**PMCID:** PMC3223560
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3223560/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3223560/pdf/nihms318212.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3223560/pdf/nihms318212.pdf)

## Abstract

Genetic research on cocaine dependence may help clarify our understanding of the disorder as well as provide insights for effective treatment. Since endocannabinoid signaling and dopamine neurotransmission have been shown to be involved with drug reward, genes related to these systems are plausible candidates for susceptibility to cocaine dependence. The cannabinoid receptor 1 (CB1) protein regulates both the endocannabinoid and dopaminergic neurobiological systems, and polymorphisms in the cannabinoid receptor gene, CNR1, have been previously been associated with substance dependence. In this study, we attempt to replicate a finding associating CNR1 with cocaine dependence in African Americans. Cocaine dependent individuals (n=883) and unaffected controls (n=334) of African descent were genotyped for two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the CB1 gene (rs6454674, rs806368). We observed a significant difference in genotype frequencies between cases and controls for both SNPs (p≤0.05). This study confirms the association between variants in the CNR1 and cocaine dependence. However, considering the substantial co-morbidity of cocaine dependence with other drugs of abuse, additional studies are necessary to determine whether polymorphisms in CNR1 induce a general susceptibility to substance dependence or are specific to cocaine addiction.

Keywords: Addiction, Association study, Cocaine, Cannabinoid receptor, Genetics, Substance abuse

## Introduction

The 2002 National Survey on Drug Use and Health revealed that nearly 6 million Americans age 12 years and above used cocaine during the year prior to the survey, making cocaine one of the most commonly used illicit drugs in the United States ([Nsdhu, 2003](#R26)). Repeated exposure to cocaine can lead to the rapid escalation of compulsive drug seeking behavior, which persists despite negative socioeconomic and health consequences, and is characteristic of cocaine dependence. It has been estimated that 5-6% of recent cocaine users will become cocaine dependent after the onset of first use ([O’brien & Anthony, 2005](#R27)). To date there are no Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved pharmacological treatments for cocaine dependence and therefore studies into the genetic basis of this disorder may help elucidate the neurobiological basis of cocaine dependence and in turn generate new pharmacological therapies.

The neurotransmitter dopamine is known to play a major role in drug reward ([Dackis & O’brien, 2005](#R13)). Elevations in extracellular dopamine (DA) in brain regions such as the nucleus accumbens and the ventral striatum are believed to underlie the reinforcing properties of cocaine ([Di Chiara et al., 2004](#R15), [Volkow, 2002](#R36)) as cocaine binds to DA receptors and decreases DA re-uptake ([Hyman et al., 2006](#R21)). Cannabinoid 1 receptors (CB1) are G-protein coupled receptors which are densely expressed throughout the mesolimbic system ([Herkenham et al., 1990](#R19)). CB1 plays a direct role in the dopaminergic reward pathway, relaying signal cascades at the terminals of striatal medium spiny neurons, regulating dopamine and glutamate release as well as the long-lasting neuroplastic desensitizing effects inherent with chronic cocaine use ([Cheer et al., 2007a](#R8), [Corbillé et al., 2007](#R10), [Filip et al., 2006](#R16), [Xi et al., 2006](#R38)).

Pharmacological blockade of CB1 receptors has been shown to reduce the inhibitory effect of cocaine on GABA neurotransmission in rats ([Centonze et al., 2004](#R7)) and attenuate the dopaminergic increases in the nucleus accumbens induced by cocaine administration ([Cheer et al., 2007b](#R9)). CB1 receptors have also proven to be relevant for relapse into cocaine seeking behavior as CB1 antagonists (SR141716) administered during prolonged cocaine withdrawal have been shown to reduce cocaine seeking behaviour induced by cue-exposure. Conversely, pre-treatment with CB1 agonists increases relapse behavior in mice undergoing cocaine withdrawal ([De Vries et al., 2001](#R14)).

While the interplay between genetic and environmental factors underlying cocaine dependence is not fully understood, studies have estimated that approximately two thirds of an individual’s risk for developing cocaine dependence is heritable ([Kendler et al., 2000](#R22), [Kendler & Prescott, 1998](#R23)). As the cannabinoid system is known to influence dopaminergic signaling and relapse to cocaine seeking behavior in animals, genetic studies analysing polymorphisms in *CNR1* may reveal genetic variation that increases the risk for cocaine dependence. Two SNPs in *CNR1*, rs6454674 and rs806368, were found to be associated with cocaine dependence and cocaine induced paranoia across three independent populations of European and African Americans ([Zuo et al., 2009](#R39)). These same SNPs were found to be associated with alcohol and illicit drug dependence in European Americans ([Zuo et al, 2007](#R40)) and rs806368 has demonstrated association with cannabis dependence (Agrawal et al, 2008). The purpose of the current study was to analyze these two SNPs in an independent African American population of cocaine dependents in order to provide replication of the findings of Zuo et al ([Zuo et al., 2009](#R39)). The two SNPs, rs6454674 and rs806368, were chosen for replication because of their consistent association with both cocaine and general substance dependence.

## Materials and Methods

### Sample collection

Blood samples for DNA isolation from cocaine-dependent individuals of African-American decent (n=926; 67% male, mean age: 43) were collected during clinical studies of cocaine dependence at the University of Pennsylvania Treatment Research Center. Subjects were at least 18 years of age. All were assessed with the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM Disorders (SCID) and urine drug screens were obtained. All patients had a clinical diagnosis of cocaine dependence as defined by *DSM-IV*. Family history was not obtained and ethnicity was determined by self-report. All psychiatric axis I disorders except alcohol dependence/abuse and nicotine dependence were used as exclusion criteria. In addition, participants were excluded if they had a history of a seizure disorder (except cocaine-induced seizures) or a severe medical illness, including a history of AIDS (but not merely of HIV+ status). Individuals currently being treated with psychotropic medications or with psychiatric symptoms, including psychosis, dementia, suicidal or homicidal ideation, mania or depression requiring antidepressant therapy were also excluded. Blood samples from control persons of African-American descent (n=346; 32% male, mean age: 40) were collected at the University of Pennsylvania, Thomas Jefferson University, and the National Institute of Mental Health Genetics Initiative ([www.nimhgenetics.org](http://www.nimhgenetics.org)). Control individuals were screened for history of substance use disorders or other psychiatric illness. They were not assessed with a urine drug screen and ethnicity was determined by self-report. Subjects with a history of substance dependence or a history of major psychiatric illness were excluded from this study ([Berrettini & Persico, 1996](#R6)). Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral leukocytes within obtained blood samples by standard protocols. All protocols were approved by the Institutional Review Boards at Thomas Jefferson University and the University of Pennsylvania, and all subjects provided written informed consent before blood sample collection.

### SNP selection and genotyping

The *CB1* gene is located on chromosome 6q14-q15. *CB1* contains 1 exon and spans 26,084bp (Ensembl Human Exon View accession ENST00000369499). SNPs for genotyping were selected based on previous positive findings in a European American population (SNP1: rs6454674; SNP2: rs806368) ([Zuo et al., 2009](#R39)). SNP genotyping was performed using Applied Biosystems Inc. (ABI) (Foster City, CA, USA) ‘Assays-on-demand’ as per manufacturer protocol.

### Statistical analysis

The allelic and genotypic association of SNPs with cocaine dependence was determined using the chi-square test and p-values were corrected for multiple comparisons using the false discovery rate (FDR) procedure ([Benjamini et al., 2001](#R4)) in the software package PLINK v1.04 ([Purcell et al., 2007](#R30)). Correction for multiple testing was carried out using the false discovery rate (FDR) method ([Benjamini & Hochberg, 2000](#R5)).

Haplotype analysis was performed in PLINK using the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm implicated in the software packages ([http://pngu.mgh.harvard.edu/~purcell/plink/](http://pngu.mgh.harvard.edu/~purcell/plink/)) ([Purcell et al., 2007](#R30)). Permutation analysis of the haplotypic associations was conducted to randomly reassign the case and control labels in the dataset and give a significance level corrected for all markers or haplotypes tested. A total of 10 000 permutations were performed in each permutation analysis.

Our sample size had reasonable power to detect a disease association at a *P*-value less than or equal to 0.05, assuming an odds ratio of 1.5 and a minor allele frequency of 30% (82% for a general 2df test, 89% for a dominant, and 15% for a recessive mode of inheritance).

## Results

Measures of linkage disequilibrium (LD) between the two markers were shown to be weak (r^2^ =0.002, D’ =0.179) which is consistent with the findings of Zuo et al who also analysed these SNPs in an independent African American population ([Zuo et al., 2009](#R39)). Quality control was maintained by genotyping 10% duplicates for cases and controls, and the concordance rate for our genotyping was calculated to be 99.92%. None of the genotype counts deviated significantly from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in the total population ([Balding, 2006](#R3)) however, rs806368 displayed a significant deviation from Hardy-Weinberg amongst the cases (p=0.03). State the nature of the deviation, eg, an excess of homozygotes for the minor allele.

Single marker analysis yielded evidence for genotypic association for both rs806368 (p=0.017, OR=0.75, 95% C.I =0.54-0.96) and rs6454674 (p=0.05, OR=1.14, 95% C.I=0.94-1.39). The C allele of rs806368 was found to have a protective effect against cocaine dependence and was observed at a higher genotype frequency in controls compared to cases. For rs6454674 the G allele was observed to be at a higher frequency in cases that were minor homozygotes for this allele (0.13 vs 0.08) and therefore conferred risk for cocaine dependence. Genotypic and allelic associations are summarized in [table one](#T1). After performing genotypic associations it became apparent that rs6454674 was acting under a recessive mode of inheritance and therefore, performing a chi-square test to analyze the recessive SNP action of rs6454674 (DD vs Dd,dd) increased the significance to p=0.017). The genotypic tests for association for both SNPs withstood correction for multiple testing according to the false discovery method (FDR P=≤0.05). Haplotype analysis did not show significant associations for two marker analysis (data not shown).

### Table one.

| SNP | Population (N) | AA | Aa | aa | Minor Allele | P-Value | MAF | P-Value | OR (95% C.I) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| rs806368 | Cases (883) | 0.817 | 0.182 | 0.001 | C | 0.0171 | 0.09 | 0.05 | 0.75 (0.54-0.96) |
| Controls (334) | 0.78 | 0.21 | 0.02 |   |   | 0.12 |   |   |  |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| rs6454674 | Cases (859) | 0.42 | 0.45 | 0.13 | G | 0.05 0.0172 | 0.35 | 0.19 | 1.14 (0.94-1.39) |
| Controls (316) | 0.43 | 0.49 | 0.08 |   |   | 0.32 |   |   |  |

Table Caption: Comparison of genotype and allele frequencies in 2 CNR1 SNPs. P-values represent PLINK generated χ2 tests for association between cocaine dependent cases and unrelated controls.

A meta-analysis was conducted by combining the genotype counts from the African American individuals reported in Zuo et al ([Zuo et al., 2009](#R39)) with that of the current study. When the data was combined rs806368 no longer remained significant (p=0.19) however, rs6454674 increased in significance (p=0.004). These data are presented in [table two](#T2).

### Table two.

| SNP | Population (N) | AA | Aa | aa | P-Value |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |
| rs806368 | Cases (1276) | 0.817 | 0.175 | 0.008 | 0.19 |
| Controls (543) | 0.80 | 0.19 | 0.02 |   |  |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |
| rs6454674 | Cases (1193) | 0.44 | 0.42 | 0.14 | 0.004 |
| Controls (492) | 0.41 | 0.5 | 0.09 |   |  |

Table Caption: Meta-analysis comparing genotype frequencies in cocaine dependents and unrelated controls using data from the present study combined with genotype counts from the African Americans genotyped in Zuo et al (2009).

## Discussion

The data presented in this study demonstrate an association of 2 *CNR1* SNPs, rs6454674 and rs806368, with cocaine dependence in individuals of African descent. In addition, we performed a meta-analysis using the data reported by Zuo and colleagues ([Zuo et al., 2009](#R39)). The meta-analysis provides the largest sample of African American cocaine dependents and controls (N=1800) studied for genetic risk for cocaine dependence to date, and the findings display an increased significance from p=0.02 in our sample to p=0.004 for rs6454674. These data confirm the relevance of these 2 polymorphisms when considering genetic risk for cocaine dependence in African Americans; however it should be noted that our findings may reflect an association with a more general substance abuse phenotype. Poly-substance abuse is high amongst cocaine dependents, it has been reported that amongst cocaine dependants alcohol co-dependence occurs approximately 85% of the time in the community ([Regier et al., 1990](#R31)). rs6454674 has previously been associated with alcohol dependence and drug dependence (cocaine and opioids) in European Americans ([Zuo et al., 2007](#R40)). Furthemore, rs806368 has been modestly associated with cannabis dependence in European Americans (P=0.05) and the co-morbitity with alcoholism in this sample was estimated to be roughly 70% ([Agrawal et al., 2009](#R1)). As CB1 has been found to interact with brain dopaminergic, glutamatergic, GABAergic and opioidergic systems its association with substance dependence in general is plausible considering the receptor mediates the neurochemical effects of nearly all drugs of abuse ([Ameri, 1999](#R2), [Manzanares et al., 1999](#R25), [Romero et al., 2002](#R32)). The following sentence is incorrect and must be re-written. Interestingly animal models have shown that CB1 does not modulate the primary reinforcing effect of psychostimulants as *Cnr1* null mice do not self-administer cocaine or show changes to conditioned place preference when compared to wild-types ([Cossu et al., 2001](#R11)). However, CB1 is required for the maintenance of cocaine seeking behavior as *Cnr1* knockout mice will not continue to seek cocaine when the effort to obtain cocaine infusions is enhanced ([Soria et al., 2005](#R33)). Conversely, mice lacking *Cnr1* show a decreased alcohol preference and a reduction in ethanol place preference ([Hungund et al., 2003](#R20), [Thanos et al., 2005](#R34), [Wang et al., 2003](#R37)). Therefore, considering the high co-morbidity of alcohol dependence with cocaine and cannabis dependence, future work should be carried out to determine whether *CNR1* polymorphisms are relevant for addiction to cocaine or whether this reflects a stronger association with alcohol dependence.

One caveat to our finding is that the are very few homozygotes for the minor allele among the controls and the cases at rs806368, suggesting that the statistical significance may be a false positive. Larger samples sizes are required when the minor allele frequency is low. Our finding associating rs654657 with cocaine dependence in African Americans confirms the findings of Zuo et al however rs806368 was only found to be associated with European Americans in this study as they report no association in African Americans. It should be noted that genetic studies including individuals of self-reported ancestry are susceptible to population stratification ([Freedman et al., 2004](#R17)) and the genetic admixture in African Americans has been shown to be larger than expected ([Parra et al., 2001](#R28), [Pfaff et al., 2004](#R29), [Tian et al., 2006](#R35)). Indeed, rs806363 has a higher minor allele frequency in Europeans (C=0.19) compared to Yoruban Africans in Nigeria (C=0.08) according to data from the International Hapmap Project ([www.hapmap.org](http://www.hapmap.org)). Therefore, different degrees of population admixture between the two African American samples may be responsible for the discrepancies in the association analyses. There are other studies which have failed to associate *CNR1* with substance dependence however these studies have either had considerably smaller sample sizes ([Heller et al., 2001](#R18)) or analysed different polymorphisms to the ones presented in this study ([Covault et al., 2001](#R12), [Li et al., 2000](#R24)). Indeed, the effect sizes reported in this association study for each SNP are modest (OR =1.14) and therefore a large sample size would be needed to detect such a small effect. Despite this, the result should be interpreted with caution and further replication may be needed to confirm the role of rs806363, if any, in cocaine dependence.

In order to understand the biological relevance of these findings it is important to know how these 2 polymorphisms in *CNR1* convey risk for cocaine dependence. rs806368 is located in the 3’UTR and is in a region of the genome characterized by high evolutionary conservation (Perhaps show a figure with the diagram of the gene and the location of the SNPs with the r2 value. Also show the evolutionary conservation. It is plausible therefore that this SNP affects the stability of the *CNR1* mRNA transcript which may reduce the rate of translation. This may have biological consequences relevant for cocaine dependence. However, the 2 SNPs analyzed in this study may only be acting as proxies for the true causal variants and therefore additional work is needed to identify the mechanism by which these genetic variants increase the risk for cocaine dependence. In conclusion, there is now substantial emerging data to suggest that polymorphisms in *CNR1* are relevant for susceptibility to substance dependence. One group of individuals for whom this is becoming increasingly relevant is cocaine dependents of African descent. Further work is warranted to identify the biological mechanisms by which *CNR1* SNPs increase risk for cocaine dependence and also to determine whether *CNR1* is specifically relevant for cocaine dependence or substance dependence in general.

## References

1. Agrawal A, Wetherill L, Dick DM, Xuei X, Hinrichs A, Hesselbrock V, Kramer J, Nurnberger JI, Schuckit M, Bierut LJ, Edenberg HJ, Foroud T. Evidence for Association Between Polymorphisms in the Cannabinoid Receptor 1 (CNR1) Gene and Cannabis Dependence. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part B-Neuropsychiatric Genetics. 2009;150B:736–740. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30881.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.b.30881) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2703788/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19016476/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=American%20Journal%20of%20Medical%20Genetics%20Part%20B-Neuropsychiatric%20Genetics&title=Evidence%20for%20Association%20Between%20Polymorphisms%20in%20the%20Cannabinoid%20Receptor%201%20(CNR1)%20Gene%20and%20Cannabis%20Dependence&author=A%20Agrawal&author=L%20Wetherill&author=DM%20Dick&author=X%20Xuei&author=A%20Hinrichs&volume=150B&publication_year=2009&pages=736-740&pmid=19016476&doi=10.1002/ajmg.b.30881&)

2. Ameri A. The effects of cannabinoids on the brain. Progress in Neurobiology. 1999;58:315–348. doi: 10.1016/s0301-0082(98)00087-2.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0301-0082(98)00087-2) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10368032/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Progress%20in%20Neurobiology&title=The%20effects%20of%20cannabinoids%20on%20the%20brain&author=A%20Ameri&volume=58&publication_year=1999&pages=315-348&pmid=10368032&doi=10.1016/s0301-0082(98)00087-2&)

3. Balding DJ. A tutorial on statistical methods for population association studies. Nature Reviews Genetics. 2006;7:781–791. doi: 10.1038/nrg1916.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg1916) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16983374/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature%20Reviews%20Genetics&title=A%20tutorial%20on%20statistical%20methods%20for%20population%20association%20studies&author=DJ%20Balding&volume=7&publication_year=2006&pages=781-791&pmid=16983374&doi=10.1038/nrg1916&)

4. Benjamini Y, Drai D, Elmer G, Kafkafi N, Golani I. Controlling the false discovery rate in behavior genetics research. Behavioural brain research. 2001;125:279–284. doi: 10.1016/s0166-4328(01)00297-2.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0166-4328(01)00297-2) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11682119/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Behavioural%20brain%20research&title=Controlling%20the%20false%20discovery%20rate%20in%20behavior%20genetics%20research&author=Y%20Benjamini&author=D%20Drai&author=G%20Elmer&author=N%20Kafkafi&author=I%20Golani&volume=125&publication_year=2001&pages=279-284&pmid=11682119&doi=10.1016/s0166-4328(01)00297-2&)

5. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. On the adaptive control of the false discovery fate in multiple testing with independent statistics. Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics. 2000;25:60–83.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Journal%20of%20Educational%20and%20Behavioral%20Statistics&title=On%20the%20adaptive%20control%20of%20the%20false%20discovery%20fate%20in%20multiple%20testing%20with%20independent%20statistics&author=Y%20Benjamini&author=Y%20Hochberg&volume=25&publication_year=2000&pages=60-83&)

6. Berrettini WH, Persico AM. Dopamine D2 receptor gene polymorphisms and vulnerability to substance abuse in African Americans. Biol Psychiatry. 1996;40:144–147. doi: 10.1016/0006-3223(96)00036-4.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-3223(96)00036-4) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8793046/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biol%20Psychiatry&title=Dopamine%20D2%20receptor%20gene%20polymorphisms%20and%20vulnerability%20to%20substance%20abuse%20in%20African%20Americans&author=WH%20Berrettini&author=AM%20Persico&volume=40&publication_year=1996&pages=144-147&pmid=8793046&doi=10.1016/0006-3223(96)00036-4&)

7. Centonze D, Battista N, Rossi S, Mercuri NB, Finazzi-Agro A, Bernardi G, Calabresi P, Maccarrone M. A critical interaction between dopamine D2 receptors and endocannabinoids mediates the effects of cocaine on striatal GABAergic transmission. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2004;29:1488–1497. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300458.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.npp.1300458) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15100701/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuropsychopharmacology&title=A%20critical%20interaction%20between%20dopamine%20D2%20receptors%20and%20endocannabinoids%20mediates%20the%20effects%20of%20cocaine%20on%20striatal%20GABAergic%20transmission&author=D%20Centonze&author=N%20Battista&author=S%20Rossi&author=NB%20Mercuri&author=A%20Finazzi-Agro&volume=29&publication_year=2004&pages=1488-1497&pmid=15100701&doi=10.1038/sj.npp.1300458&)

8. Cheer JF, Wassum KM, Sombers LA, Heien ML, Ariansen JL, Aragona BJ, Phillips PE, Wightman RM. Phasic dopamine release evoked by abused substances requires cannabinoid receptor activation. J Neurosci. 2007a;27:791–795. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4152-06.2007.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4152-06.2007) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6672925/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17251418/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Neurosci&title=Phasic%20dopamine%20release%20evoked%20by%20abused%20substances%20requires%20cannabinoid%20receptor%20activation&author=JF%20Cheer&author=KM%20Wassum&author=LA%20Sombers&author=ML%20Heien&author=JL%20Ariansen&volume=27&publication_year=2007a&pages=791-795&pmid=17251418&doi=10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4152-06.2007&)

9. Cheer JF, Wassum KM, Sombers LA, Heien MLAV, Ariansen JL, Aragona BJ, Phillips PEM, Wightman RM. Phasic dopamine release evoked by abused substances requires cannabinoid receptor activation. Journal of Neuroscience. 2007b;27:791–795. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4152-06.2007.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4152-06.2007) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6672925/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17251418/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Journal%20of%20Neuroscience&title=Phasic%20dopamine%20release%20evoked%20by%20abused%20substances%20requires%20cannabinoid%20receptor%20activation&author=JF%20Cheer&author=KM%20Wassum&author=LA%20Sombers&author=MLAV%20Heien&author=JL%20Ariansen&volume=27&publication_year=2007b&pages=791-795&pmid=17251418&doi=10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4152-06.2007&)

10. Corbillé AG, Valjent E, Marsicano G, Ledent C, Lutz B, Hervé D, Girault JA. Role of cannabinoid type 1 receptors in locomotor activity and striatal signaling in response to psychostimulants. J Neurosci. 2007;27:6937–6947. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3936-06.2007.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3936-06.2007) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6672215/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17596442/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Neurosci&title=Role%20of%20cannabinoid%20type%201%20receptors%20in%20locomotor%20activity%20and%20striatal%20signaling%20in%20response%20to%20psychostimulants&author=AG%20Corbill%C3%A9&author=E%20Valjent&author=G%20Marsicano&author=C%20Ledent&author=B%20Lutz&volume=27&publication_year=2007&pages=6937-6947&pmid=17596442&doi=10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3936-06.2007&)

11. Cossu G, Ledent C, Fattore L, Imperato A, Bohme GA, Parmentier M, Fratta W. Cannabinoid CB1 receptor knockout mice fail to self-administer morphine but not other drugs of abuse. Behavioural brain research. 2001;118:61–65. doi: 10.1016/s0166-4328(00)00311-9.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0166-4328(00)00311-9) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11163634/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Behavioural%20brain%20research&title=Cannabinoid%20CB1%20receptor%20knockout%20mice%20fail%20to%20self-administer%20morphine%20but%20not%20other%20drugs%20of%20abuse&author=G%20Cossu&author=C%20Ledent&author=L%20Fattore&author=A%20Imperato&author=GA%20Bohme&volume=118&publication_year=2001&pages=61-65&pmid=11163634&doi=10.1016/s0166-4328(00)00311-9&)

12. Covault J, Gelernter J, Kranzler H. Association study of cannabinoid receptor gene (CNR1) alleles and drug dependence. Molecular Psychiatry. 2001;6:501–502. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4000925.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.mp.4000925) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11526463/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Molecular%20Psychiatry&title=Association%20study%20of%20cannabinoid%20receptor%20gene%20(CNR1)%20alleles%20and%20drug%20dependence&author=J%20Covault&author=J%20Gelernter&author=H%20Kranzler&volume=6&publication_year=2001&pages=501-502&pmid=11526463&doi=10.1038/sj.mp.4000925&)

13. Dackis C, O’Brien C. Neurobiology of addiction: treatment and public policy ramifications. Nature Neuroscience. 2005;8:1431–1436. doi: 10.1038/nn1105-1431.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1105-1431) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16251982/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature%20Neuroscience&title=Neurobiology%20of%20addiction:%20treatment%20and%20public%20policy%20ramifications&author=C%20Dackis&author=C%20O%E2%80%99Brien&volume=8&publication_year=2005&pages=1431-1436&pmid=16251982&doi=10.1038/nn1105-1431&)

14. De Vries TJ, Shaham Y, Homberg JR, Crombag H, Schuurman K, Dieben J, Vanderschuren LJMJ, Schoffelmeer ANM. A cannabinoid mechanism in relapse to cocaine seeking. Nature Medicine. 2001;7:1151–1154. doi: 10.1038/nm1001-1151.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm1001-1151) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11590440/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature%20Medicine&title=A%20cannabinoid%20mechanism%20in%20relapse%20to%20cocaine%20seeking&author=TJ%20De%20Vries&author=Y%20Shaham&author=JR%20Homberg&author=H%20Crombag&author=K%20Schuurman&volume=7&publication_year=2001&pages=1151-1154&pmid=11590440&doi=10.1038/nm1001-1151&)

15. Di Chiara G, Bassareo V, Fenu S, De Luca MA, Spina L, Cadoni C, Acquas E, Carboni E, Valentini V, Lecca D. Dopamine and drug addiction: the nucleus accumbens shell connection. Neuropharmacology. 2004;47:227–241. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2004.06.032.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2004.06.032) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15464140/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuropharmacology&title=Dopamine%20and%20drug%20addiction:%20the%20nucleus%20accumbens%20shell%20connection&author=G%20Di%20Chiara&author=V%20Bassareo&author=S%20Fenu&author=MA%20De%20Luca&author=L%20Spina&volume=47&publication_year=2004&pages=227-241&pmid=15464140&doi=10.1016/j.neuropharm.2004.06.032&)

16. Filip M, Gołda A, Zaniewska M, McCreary AC, Nowak E, Kolasiewicz W, Przegaliński E. Involvement of cannabinoid CB1 receptors in drug addiction: effects of rimonabant on behavioral responses induced by cocaine. Pharmacol Rep. 2006;58:806–819.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17220538/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacol%20Rep&title=Involvement%20of%20cannabinoid%20CB1%20receptors%20in%20drug%20addiction:%20effects%20of%20rimonabant%20on%20behavioral%20responses%20induced%20by%20cocaine&author=M%20Filip&author=A%20Go%C5%82da&author=M%20Zaniewska&author=AC%20McCreary&author=E%20Nowak&volume=58&publication_year=2006&pages=806-819&pmid=17220538&)

17. Freedman ML, Reich D, Penney KL, McDonald GJ, Mignault AA, Patterson N, Gabriel SB, Topol EJ, Smoller JW, Pato CN, Pato MT, Petryshen TYL, Kolonel LN, Lander ES, Sklar P, Henderson B, Hirschhorn JN, Altshuler D. Assessing the impact of population stratification on genetic association studies. Nature Genetics. 2004;36:388–393. doi: 10.1038/ng1333.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1333) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15052270/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature%20Genetics&title=Assessing%20the%20impact%20of%20population%20stratification%20on%20genetic%20association%20studies&author=ML%20Freedman&author=D%20Reich&author=KL%20Penney&author=GJ%20McDonald&author=AA%20Mignault&volume=36&publication_year=2004&pages=388-393&pmid=15052270&doi=10.1038/ng1333&)

18. Heller D, Schneider U, Seifert J, Cimander KF, Stuhrmann M. The cannabinoid receptor gene (CNR1) is not affected in German i.v. drug users. Addiction Biology. 2001;6:183–187. doi: 10.1080/13556210020040271.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/13556210020040271) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11341859/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Addiction%20Biology&title=The%20cannabinoid%20receptor%20gene%20(CNR1)%20is%20not%20affected%20in%20German%20i.v.%20drug%20users&author=D%20Heller&author=U%20Schneider&author=J%20Seifert&author=KF%20Cimander&author=M%20Stuhrmann&volume=6&publication_year=2001&pages=183-187&pmid=11341859&doi=10.1080/13556210020040271&)

19. Herkenham M, Lynn AB, Little MD, Johnson MR, Melvin LS, Decosta BR, Rice KC. Cannabinoid Receptor Localization in Brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 1990;87:1932–1936. doi: 10.1073/pnas.87.5.1932.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.87.5.1932) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC53598/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2308954/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proceedings%20of%20the%20National%20Academy%20of%20Sciences%20of%20the%20United%20States%20of%20America&title=Cannabinoid%20Receptor%20Localization%20in%20Brain&author=M%20Herkenham&author=AB%20Lynn&author=MD%20Little&author=MR%20Johnson&author=LS%20Melvin&volume=87&publication_year=1990&pages=1932-1936&pmid=2308954&doi=10.1073/pnas.87.5.1932&)

20. Hungund BL, Szakall I, Adam A, Basavarajappa BS, Vadasz C. Cannabinoid CB1 receptor knockout mice exhibit markedly reduced voluntary alcohol consumption and lack alcohol-induced dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens. Journal of Neurochemistry. 2003;84:698–704. doi: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.2003.01576.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1471-4159.2003.01576.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12562514/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Journal%20of%20Neurochemistry&title=Cannabinoid%20CB1%20receptor%20knockout%20mice%20exhibit%20markedly%20reduced%20voluntary%20alcohol%20consumption%20and%20lack%20alcohol-induced%20dopamine%20release%20in%20the%20nucleus%20accumbens&author=BL%20Hungund&author=I%20Szakall&author=A%20Adam&author=BS%20Basavarajappa&author=C%20Vadasz&volume=84&publication_year=2003&pages=698-704&pmid=12562514&doi=10.1046/j.1471-4159.2003.01576.x&)

21. Hyman SE, Malenka RC, Nestler EJ. Neural mechanisms of addiction: The role of reward-related learning and memory. Annual Review of Neuroscience. 2006;29:565–598. doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.113009.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.113009) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16776597/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Annual%20Review%20of%20Neuroscience&title=Neural%20mechanisms%20of%20addiction:%20The%20role%20of%20reward-related%20learning%20and%20memory&author=SE%20Hyman&author=RC%20Malenka&author=EJ%20Nestler&volume=29&publication_year=2006&pages=565-598&pmid=16776597&doi=10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.113009&)

22. Kendler KS, Karkowski LM, Neale MC, Prescott CA. Illicit psychoactive substance use, heavy use, abuse, and dependence in a US population-based sample of male twins. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2000;57:261–269. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.57.3.261.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.57.3.261) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10711912/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Archives%20of%20General%20Psychiatry&title=Illicit%20psychoactive%20substance%20use,%20heavy%20use,%20abuse,%20and%20dependence%20in%20a%20US%20population-based%20sample%20of%20male%20twins&author=KS%20Kendler&author=LM%20Karkowski&author=MC%20Neale&author=CA%20Prescott&volume=57&publication_year=2000&pages=261-269&pmid=10711912&doi=10.1001/archpsyc.57.3.261&)

23. Kendler KS, Prescott CA. Cocaine use, abuse and dependence in a population-based sample of female twins. British Journal of Psychiatry. 1998;173:345–350. doi: 10.1192/bjp.173.4.345.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.173.4.345) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9926041/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=British%20Journal%20of%20Psychiatry&title=Cocaine%20use,%20abuse%20and%20dependence%20in%20a%20population-based%20sample%20of%20female%20twins&author=KS%20Kendler&author=CA%20Prescott&volume=173&publication_year=1998&pages=345-350&pmid=9926041&doi=10.1192/bjp.173.4.345&)

24. Li T, Liu X, Zhu ZH, Zhao J, Hu X, Ball DM, Sham PC, Collier DA. No association between (AAT)(n) repeats in the cannabinoid receptor gene (CNR1) and heroin abuse in a Chinese population. Molecular Psychiatry. 2000;5:128–130. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4000670.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.mp.4000670) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10822338/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Molecular%20Psychiatry&title=No%20association%20between%20(AAT)(n)%20repeats%20in%20the%20cannabinoid%20receptor%20gene%20(CNR1)%20and%20heroin%20abuse%20in%20a%20Chinese%20population&author=T%20Li&author=X%20Liu&author=ZH%20Zhu&author=J%20Zhao&author=X%20Hu&volume=5&publication_year=2000&pages=128-130&pmid=10822338&doi=10.1038/sj.mp.4000670&)

25. Manzanares J, Corchero J, Romero J, Fernandez-Ruiz JJ, Ramos JA, Fuentes JA. Pharmacological and biochemical interactions between opioids and cannabinoids. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences. 1999;20:287–294. doi: 10.1016/s0165-6147(99)01339-5.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0165-6147(99)01339-5) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10390647/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Trends%20in%20Pharmacological%20Sciences&title=Pharmacological%20and%20biochemical%20interactions%20between%20opioids%20and%20cannabinoids&author=J%20Manzanares&author=J%20Corchero&author=J%20Romero&author=JJ%20Fernandez-Ruiz&author=JA%20Ramos&volume=20&publication_year=1999&pages=287-294&pmid=10390647&doi=10.1016/s0165-6147(99)01339-5&)

26. NSDHU. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Results from the 2002 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: National Findings. Office of Applied Studies, NHSDA Series H-22. 2003 DHHS Publication No. SMA 03–3836.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Office%20of%20Applied%20Studies,%20NHSDA%20Series%20H-22&title=Substance%20Abuse%20and%20Mental%20Health%20Services%20Administration.%20Results%20from%20the%202002%20National%20Survey%20on%20Drug%20Use%20and%20Health:%20National%20Findings&publication_year=2003&)

27. O’Brien MS, Anthony JC. Risk of becoming cocaine dependent: Epidemiological estimates for the United States, 2000-2001 (vol 30, pg 1005, 2005) Neuropsychopharmacology. 2005;30:1588–1588. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300681.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.npp.1300681) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15785780/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuropsychopharmacology&title=Risk%20of%20becoming%20cocaine%20dependent:%20Epidemiological%20estimates%20for%20the%20United%20States,%202000-2001%20(vol%2030,%20pg%201005,%202005)&author=MS%20O%E2%80%99Brien&author=JC%20Anthony&volume=30&publication_year=2005&pages=1588-1588&pmid=15785780&doi=10.1038/sj.npp.1300681&)

28. Parra EJ, Kittles RA, Argyropoulos G, Pfaff CL, Hiester K, Bonilla C, Sylvester N, Parrish-Gause D, Garvey WT, Jin L, McKeigue PM, Kamboh MI, Ferrell RE, Pollitzer WS, Shriver MD. Ancestral proportions and admixture dynamics in geographically defined African Americans living in South Carolina. American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 2001;114:18–29. doi: 10.1002/1096-8644(200101)114:1<18::AID-AJPA1002>3.0.CO;2-2.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/1096-8644(200101)114:1<18::AID-AJPA1002>3.0.CO;2-2) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11150049/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=American%20Journal%20of%20Physical%20Anthropology&title=Ancestral%20proportions%20and%20admixture%20dynamics%20in%20geographically%20defined%20African%20Americans%20living%20in%20South%20Carolina&author=EJ%20Parra&author=RA%20Kittles&author=G%20Argyropoulos&author=CL%20Pfaff&author=K%20Hiester&volume=114&publication_year=2001&pages=18-29&pmid=11150049&doi=10.1002/1096-8644(200101)114:1<18::AID-AJPA1002>3.0.CO;2-2&)

29. Pfaff CL, Barnholtz-Sloan J, Wagner JK, Long JC. Information on ancestry from genetic markers. Genetic Epidemiology. 2004;26:305–315. doi: 10.1002/gepi.10319.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/gepi.10319) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15095390/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genetic%20Epidemiology&title=Information%20on%20ancestry%20from%20genetic%20markers&author=CL%20Pfaff&author=J%20Barnholtz-Sloan&author=JK%20Wagner&author=JC%20Long&volume=26&publication_year=2004&pages=305-315&pmid=15095390&doi=10.1002/gepi.10319&)

30. Purcell S, Neale B, Todd-Brown K, Thomas L, Ferreira MA, Bender D, Maller J, Sklar P, de Bakker PI, Daly MJ, Sham PC. PLINK: a tool set for whole-genome association and population-based linkage analyses. American journal of human genetics. 2007;81:559–575. doi: 10.1086/519795.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/519795) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1950838/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17701901/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=American%20journal%20of%20human%20genetics&title=PLINK:%20a%20tool%20set%20for%20whole-genome%20association%20and%20population-based%20linkage%20analyses&author=S%20Purcell&author=B%20Neale&author=K%20Todd-Brown&author=L%20Thomas&author=MA%20Ferreira&volume=81&publication_year=2007&pages=559-575&pmid=17701901&doi=10.1086/519795&)

31. Regier DA, Farmer ME, Rae DS, Locke BZ, Keith SJ, Judd LL, Goodwin FK. Comorbidity of Mental-Disorders with Alcohol and Other Drug-Abuse - Results from the Epidemiologic Catchment-Area (Eca) Study. Jama-Journal of the American Medical Association. 1990;264:2511–2518.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2232018/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Jama-Journal%20of%20the%20American%20Medical%20Association&title=Comorbidity%20of%20Mental-Disorders%20with%20Alcohol%20and%20Other%20Drug-Abuse%20-%20Results%20from%20the%20Epidemiologic%20Catchment-Area%20(Eca)%20Study&author=DA%20Regier&author=ME%20Farmer&author=DS%20Rae&author=BZ%20Locke&author=SJ%20Keith&volume=264&publication_year=1990&pages=2511-2518&pmid=2232018&)

32. Romero J, Lastres-Becker I, de Miguel R, Berrendero F, Ramos JA, Fernandez-Ruiz J. The endogenous cannabinoid system and the basal ganglia: biochemical, pharmacological, and therapeutic aspects. Pharmacology & Therapeutics. 2002;95:137–152. doi: 10.1016/s0163-7258(02)00253-x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0163-7258(02)00253-x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12182961/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacology%20&%20Therapeutics&title=The%20endogenous%20cannabinoid%20system%20and%20the%20basal%20ganglia:%20biochemical,%20pharmacological,%20and%20therapeutic%20aspects&author=J%20Romero&author=I%20Lastres-Becker&author=R%20de%20Miguel&author=F%20Berrendero&author=JA%20Ramos&volume=95&publication_year=2002&pages=137-152&pmid=12182961&doi=10.1016/s0163-7258(02)00253-x&)

33. Soria G, Mendizabal V, Tourino C, Ledent C, Parmentier M, Maldonado R, Valverde O. Lack of CB1 cannabinoid receptor impairs cocaine self-administration. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2005;30:1670–1680. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300707.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.npp.1300707) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15742004/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuropsychopharmacology&title=Lack%20of%20CB1%20cannabinoid%20receptor%20impairs%20cocaine%20self-administration&author=G%20Soria&author=V%20Mendizabal&author=C%20Tourino&author=C%20Ledent&author=M%20Parmentier&volume=30&publication_year=2005&pages=1670-1680&pmid=15742004&doi=10.1038/sj.npp.1300707&)

34. Thanos PK, Dimitrakakis ES, Rice O, Gifford A, Volkow ND. Ethanol self-administration and ethanol conditioned place preference are reduced in mice lacking cannabinoid CB1 receptors. Behavioural brain research. 2005;164:206–213. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2005.06.021.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2005.06.021) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16140402/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Behavioural%20brain%20research&title=Ethanol%20self-administration%20and%20ethanol%20conditioned%20place%20preference%20are%20reduced%20in%20mice%20lacking%20cannabinoid%20CB1%20receptors&author=PK%20Thanos&author=ES%20Dimitrakakis&author=O%20Rice&author=A%20Gifford&author=ND%20Volkow&volume=164&publication_year=2005&pages=206-213&pmid=16140402&doi=10.1016/j.bbr.2005.06.021&)

35. Tian C, Hinds DA, Shigeta R, Kittles R, Ballinger DG, Seldin MF. A genomewide single-nucleotide-polymorphism panel with high ancestry information for African American admixture mapping. American journal of human genetics. 2006;79:640–649. doi: 10.1086/507954.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/507954) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1592561/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16960800/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=American%20journal%20of%20human%20genetics&title=A%20genomewide%20single-nucleotide-polymorphism%20panel%20with%20high%20ancestry%20information%20for%20African%20American%20admixture%20mapping&author=C%20Tian&author=DA%20Hinds&author=R%20Shigeta&author=R%20Kittles&author=DG%20Ballinger&volume=79&publication_year=2006&pages=640-649&pmid=16960800&doi=10.1086/507954&)

36. Volkow ND. Involvement of dopamine in drug reinforcement and addiction in human subjects. European Neuropsychopharmacology. 2002;12:S7–S7.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=European%20Neuropsychopharmacology&title=Involvement%20of%20dopamine%20in%20drug%20reinforcement%20and%20addiction%20in%20human%20subjects&author=ND%20Volkow&volume=12&publication_year=2002&pages=S7-S7&)

37. Wang L, Liu H, Harvey-White J, Zimmer A, Kunos G. Endocannabinoid signaling via cannabinoid receptor 1 is involved in ethanol preference and its age-dependent decline in mice. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2003;100:1393–1398. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0336351100.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0336351100) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC298783/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12538878/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proceedings%20of%20the%20National%20Academy%20of%20Sciences%20of%20the%20United%20States%20of%20America&title=Endocannabinoid%20signaling%20via%20cannabinoid%20receptor%201%20is%20involved%20in%20ethanol%20preference%20and%20its%20age-dependent%20decline%20in%20mice&author=L%20Wang&author=H%20Liu&author=J%20Harvey-White&author=A%20Zimmer&author=G%20Kunos&volume=100&publication_year=2003&pages=1393-1398&pmid=12538878&doi=10.1073/pnas.0336351100&)

38. Xi ZX, Gilbert JG, Peng XQ, Pak AC, Li X, Gardner EL. Cannabinoid CB1 receptor antagonist AM251 inhibits cocaine-primed relapse in rats: role of glutamate in the nucleus accumbens. J Neurosci. 2006;26:8531–8536. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0726-06.2006.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0726-06.2006) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6674340/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16914679/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Neurosci&title=Cannabinoid%20CB1%20receptor%20antagonist%20AM251%20inhibits%20cocaine-primed%20relapse%20in%20rats:%20role%20of%20glutamate%20in%20the%20nucleus%20accumbens&author=ZX%20Xi&author=JG%20Gilbert&author=XQ%20Peng&author=AC%20Pak&author=X%20Li&volume=26&publication_year=2006&pages=8531-8536&pmid=16914679&doi=10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0726-06.2006&)

39. Zuo L, Kranzler HR, Luo X, Yang BZ, Weiss R, Brady K, Poling J, Farrer L, Gelernter J. Interaction between Two Independent CNR1 Variants Increases Risk for Cocaine Dependence in European Americans: A Replication Study in Family-Based Sample and Population-Based Sample. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2009;34:1504–1513. doi: 10.1038/npp.2008.206.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2008.206) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2879626/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19052543/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuropsychopharmacology&title=Interaction%20between%20Two%20Independent%20CNR1%20Variants%20Increases%20Risk%20for%20Cocaine%20Dependence%20in%20European%20Americans:%20A%20Replication%20Study%20in%20Family-Based%20Sample%20and%20Population-Based%20Sample&author=L%20Zuo&author=HR%20Kranzler&author=X%20Luo&author=BZ%20Yang&author=R%20Weiss&volume=34&publication_year=2009&pages=1504-1513&pmid=19052543&doi=10.1038/npp.2008.206&)

40. Zuo LJ, Kranzler HR, Luo XG, Covault J, Gelernter J. CNR1 variation modulates risk for drug and alcohol dependence. Biological Psychiatry. 2007;62:616–626. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.12.004.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.12.004) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17509535/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biological%20Psychiatry&title=CNR1%20variation%20modulates%20risk%20for%20drug%20and%20alcohol%20dependence&author=LJ%20Zuo&author=HR%20Kranzler&author=XG%20Luo&author=J%20Covault&author=J%20Gelernter&volume=62&publication_year=2007&pages=616-626&pmid=17509535&doi=10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.12.004&)
