# Variant curation expert panel recommendations for RYR1 pathogenicity classifications in malignant hyperthermia susceptibility.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Jennifer J Johnston, Robert T Dirksen, Thierry Girard, Stephen G Gonsalves, Philip M Hopkins, Sheila Riazi, Louis A Saddic, Nyamkhishig Sambuughin, Richa Saxena, Kathryn Stowell, James Weber, Henry Rosenberg, Leslie G Biesecker
**Journal:** Genetics in medicine : official journal of the American College of Medical Genetics
**Year:** 2021
**PMID:** 33767344

## Abstract

**PURPOSE:** As a ClinGen Expert Panel (EP) we set out to adapt the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG)/Association for Molecular Pathology (AMP) pathogenicity criteria for classification of RYR1 variants as related to autosomal dominantly inherited malignant hyperthermia (MH).

**METHODS:** We specified ACMG/AMP criteria for variant classification for RYR1 and MH. Proposed rules were piloted on 84 variants. We applied quantitative evidence calibration for several criteria using likelihood ratios based on the Bayesian framework.

**RESULTS:** Seven ACMG/AMP criteria were adopted without changes, nine were adopted with RYR1-specific modifications, and ten were dropped. The in silico (PP3 and BP4) and hotspot criteria (PM1) were evaluated quantitatively. REVEL gave an odds ratio (OR) of 23:1 for PP3 and 14:1 for BP4 using trichotomized cutoffs of ≥0.85 (pathogenic) and ≤0.5 (benign). The PM1 hotspot criterion had an OR of 24:1. PP3 and PM1 were implemented at moderate strength. Applying the revised ACMG/AMP criteria to 44 recognized MH variants, 29 were classified as pathogenic, 13 as likely pathogenic, and 2 as variants of uncertain significance.

**CONCLUSION:** Curation of these variants will facilitate classification of RYR1/MH genomic testing results, which is especially important for secondary findings analyses. Our approach to quantitatively calibrating criteria is generalizable to other variant curation expert panels.
