# Genetic polymorphisms of CYP2C8, CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 in Ecuadorian Mestizo and Spaniard populations: a comparative study.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Jorge Vicente, Fabricio González-Andrade, Antonia Soriano, Ana Fanlo, Begoña Martínez-Jarreta, Blanca Sinués
**Journal:** Molecular biology reports
**Year:** 2014
**PMID:** 24430292

## Abstract

This study was designed to investigate the potential differences between Spaniards and Ecuadorian Mestizo people regarding CYP2C8, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19 genetic polymorphisms. DNA from 282 Spaniard and 297 Ecuadorian subjects were analyzed by either a previously reported pyrosequencing method (CY2C8*3, CYP2C9*2, CYP2C9*3, CYP2C19*2 and CYP2C19*3) or a nested PCR technique (CYP2C19*17). Whereas CYP2C19*17 allele distribution was higher in Ecuadorians than in Spaniards (P < 0.001) and the frequency of CYP2C19*3 was similar in these two populations (P > 0.05), the other allelic variants were detected at significantly lower frequencies in Ecuadorians than in Spaniards (P < 0.05). According to the diplotype distributions, the prevalence of the presumed CYP2C9 and CYP2C8 extensive metabolizers was higher in Ecuadorians than in Spaniards (P < 0.05). Individuals genotyped CYP2C19*1/*17 and *17/*17 who were considered as ultrarapid metabolizers were overrepresented in Ecuadorians in relation to Spaniards (P < 0.001). By contrast, among Ecuadorians no poor metabolizers (PMs) of either CYP2C8 or CYP2C9 were found and only two individuals were CYP2C19 PMs. These data are compatible with a higher CYP2C8, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19 activity in Mestizo Ecuadorians as opposed to Spaniards, which could imply differences in dosage requirements for drugs metabolized by these cytochromes and should also be considered in allele-disease association studies.
