# Analysis of the CYP2C19 genetic polymorphism in Han and Uyghur patients with cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases in the Kashi area of Xinjiang.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Yadong Li, Heyin Yang, Xiaoguang Zou, Lijun Xiong, Zhen Li, Jianzhang Luo, Bo Zhao, Wen Liu, Xili Du
**Journal:** Medical science monitor : international medical journal of experimental and clinical research
**Year:** 2014
**PMID:** 25381554

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** The aim of this study was to analyze the CYP2C19 genetic polymorphism among Han and Uyghur patients with cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases in the Kashi area of Xinjiang.

**MATERIAL/METHODS:** We enrolled 1020 patients with cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases, including 220 Han subjects and 800 Uyghur subjects. We used the gene chip method to detect polymorphisms in CYP2C19. The allele frequencies of CYP2C19 and the metabolic phenotype frequencies were then compared between the 2 ethnic groups.

**RESULTS:** The frequency of CYP2C19 *1 was 0.6454 in Han subjects and 0.7869 in Uyghur subjects, and the difference was statistically significant (P<0.05). The frequency of CYP2C19 *2 was 0.3273 in Han subjects and 0.1837 in Uyghur subjects (P<0.05). The frequency of the homozygous extensive metabolizer phenotype was 42.72% and 62.13% in Han and Uyghur subjects, respectively (P<0.01). The frequency of the heterozygous extensive metabolizer phenotype was 43.64% and 33.13% in Han and Uyghur subjects, respectively (P<0.01). The frequency of poor metabolizers in Han and Uyghur subjects was 13.64% and 4.76%, respectively (P<0.01).

**CONCLUSIONS:** Among patients with cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases located in the Kashgar Prefecture of Xinjiang, there is a differential distribution of CYP2C19 genotypes between the Han and Uyghur populations. Uyghur patients showed higher frequencies of extensive metabolizer genotypes than Han patients, while Han patients showed higher frequencies of poor metabolizer genotypes than Uyghur patients.
