# Genetic polymorphisms of cytochrome P450 2B6 gene in Han Chinese.

Su Guan, Min Huang, Eli Chan, Xiao Chen, Wei Duan, Shu-Feng Zhou

*European journal of pharmaceutical sciences : official journal of the European Federation for Pharmaceutical Sciences* (2006)

PMID: 16815693
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejps.2006.04.004

---

**Note: This article is not available on PubMed Central (Open Access). Only the abstract is included below.**

## Abstract

Cytochrome P450 (CYP2B6) is an important enzyme that metabolizes more than eight compounds and about 3.0% of therapeutic drugs. The genetic polymorphisms of CYP2B6 have earlier been studied in Caucasian, Japanese and Korean, but the data are lacking for Han Chinese. The aim of this study was to investigate the frequencies of allelic variants of CYP2B6 in healthy Han Chinese and compare with those in other ethnic groups reported in the literature. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) method was used to test the five common non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of CYP2B6 gene, namely, 64C>T, 516G>T, 777C>A, 785A>G and 1459C>T in unrelated healthy Han Chinese (n=193). The study demonstrated that the frequencies of 64C>T, 516G>T, 777C>A, 785A>G and 1459C>T SNPs in Han Chinese were 0.03, 0.21, 0, 0.28 and 0.003, respectively. The frequencies of all five SNPs tested in female were higher than those in male, but the statistical difference was insignificant (P>0.05). Compared to the data reported in the literature, the frequencies of common CYP2B6 allelic variants in Chinese are similar to those of other Asian populations including Japanese and Korean, but markedly different from those in Caucasians. These results indicate the presence of marked ethnic difference in CYP2B6 SNP frequencies between Chinese and Caucasian. Further studies are required to explore the impact of these SNPs of CYP2B6 gene on the clinical response (efficacy and toxicity) to drugs that are substrates for CYP2B6 in patients.
