# SLCO1B1 and SLCO1B3 genetic mutations in Taiwanese patients with Rotor syndrome.

Ya-Yuan Cheng, Kai-Chi Chang, Pei-Lung Chen, Chun-Yan Yeung, Bang-Yu Liou, Huey-Ling Chen

*Journal of the Formosan Medical Association = Taiwan yi zhi* (2023)

PMID: 36964102
DOI: 10.1016/j.jfma.2023.03.003

---

**Note: This article is not available on PubMed Central (Open Access). Only the abstract is included below.**

## Abstract

Rotor syndrome is a rare, benign, inherited disorder that is commonly associated with mild hyperbilirubinemia. It is caused by bi-allelic pathological variants in both SLCO1B1 and SLCO1B3 genes, causing defective OATP1B1 and OATP1B3 in the sinusoidal membrane and interrupted bilirubin uptake of the hepatocytes. We report five Taiwanese pediatric and adult patients aged 5-32 years presenting with conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, and were found to have genetic variants of SLCO1B1 and SLCO1B3. Two also had history of prolonged neonatal jaundice. Genetic analysis using panel-based next generation sequencing revealed three patients with homozygous mutations c.1738C>T (p.R580∗) in SLCO1B1 and a transposon LINE-1 insertion in SLCO1B3, one patient with homozygous mutations for another haplotype, c.757C>T (p.R253∗) in SLCO1B1 and c.1747+1G>A in SLCO1B3. Another patient had heterozygous c.1738C>T (p.R580∗) in SLCO1B1 linked with a LINE-1 insertion in SLCO1B3, and heterozygous c.757C>T (p.R253∗) in SLCO1B1 linked with c.1747+1G>A in SLCO1B3. In conclusion, we present the first time of genetic diagnosis of Rotor syndrome in Taiwan. Advanced genetic testing has enhanced the diagnosis of rare diseases with mild symptoms.
