# Comparison of genetic variation in drug ADME-related genes in Thais with Caucasian, African and Asian HapMap populations.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Jiraphun Jittikoon, Surakameth Mahasirimongkol, Angkana Charoenyingwattana, Usa Chaikledkaew, Pramote Tragulpiankit, Supachoke Mangmool, Wimala Inunchot, Chayapol Somboonyosdes, Nuanjun Wichukchinda, Pathom Sawanpanyalert, Yijing He, Howard L McLeod, Wasun Chantratita
**Journal:** Journal of human genetics
**Year:** 2016
**PMID:** 26423926

## Abstract

The objectives of this study are to investigate allele frequencies of drug absorption, distribution, metabolism and elimination (ADME)-related genes in the Thai population and to compare these genes to HapMap populations including Caucasians (CEU), Africans (YRI) and Asians (CHB/JPT). Genetic variations of drug ADME-related genes in 190 Thais were investigated using drug metabolizing enzymes and transporters (DMET) plus genotyping system. We examined 1936 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 225 genes that have documented functional and clinical significances in phase I and phase II drug metabolism enzymes, drug transporters and other genes involved in ADME processes. Distributions of genotyping data from Thai were compared with other HapMap populations including Caucasian, African and Asian populations. The analysis demonstrated 43 SNPs with statistical significance comparing among five populations. However, only 26 SNPs showed statistical significance in pair-wise comparisons between Thai versus CEU and Thai versus CHB/JPT. These 26 SNPs belong to 13 groups of drug ADME-related genes which are CYP2A6, CYP3A5, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, VKORC1, COMT, NAT2, TPMT, UGT1A1 and SLCO1B1. These genes demonstrated clinical significances as previously observed in many studies. The results could explain clinical variability in pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of drugs in Thais based on genetic variations in drug ADME-related gene emphasized in this article.
