# Polymorphisms in genes encoding drugs and xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes in a Brazilian population.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Vanessa Da Silva Silveira, Renata Canalle, Carlos Alberto Scrideli, Rosane Gomes de Paula Queiroz, Luiz Gonzaga Tone
**Journal:** Biomarkers : biochemical indicators of exposure, response, and susceptibility to chemicals
**Year:** 2009
**PMID:** 19330589

## Abstract

Polymorphic variations of several genes associated with drugs and xenobiotic metabolism have been linked to the factors that predispose to the carcinogenesis process. As considerable interindividual and interethnic variation in metabolizing enzyme activity has been associated with polymorphic alleles, we evaluated the frequency of the polymorphisms of CYP2D6, EPHX1 and NQO1 genes in 361 Brazilian individuals separated by ethnicity (European and African ancestry), using the polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length (PCR-RFLP) method. The allele frequencies of the variants *3 and *4 for the gene CYP2D6 were 0.04 and 0.14 for white subjects and 0.03 and 0.10 for black individuals, respectively. For the both variants of the gene EPHX1, we found higher allele frequencies among white individuals compared with mulatto subjects (0.62 vs 0.54 and 0.18 vs 0.14, respectively); however, these differences were not statistically significant (p = 0.39 and 0.56, respectively). For the NQO1 gene we observed a higher frequency of the homozygous genotype among black individuals (7.9%) compared with white subjects (6.3%) (p = 0.003). The genotype frequencies were within the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. We concluded that the allele frequencies of CYP2D6, EPHX1 and NQO1 gene polymorphisms in this Brazilian population showed ethnic variability when compared with those observed in other populations.
