# A combination of mutations in the CYP2D6*17 (CYP2D6Z) allele causes alterations in enzyme function.

## Metadata
**Authors:** M Oscarson, M Hidestrand, I Johansson, M Ingelman-Sundberg
**Journal:** Molecular pharmacology
**Year:** 1997
**PMID:** 9415713

## Abstract

In many black African populations, the capacity for CYP2D6-dependent drug metabolism is generally reduced. A specific variant of the CYP2D6 gene (CYP2D6*17) that carries three functional mutations (T107I, R296C, and S486T) has been found to be present in Zimbabwean subjects with impaired CYP2D6-dependent hydroxylase activity. To evaluate whether the CYP2D6*17 allele was the major cause behind the decreased rate of drug metabolism and to examine the role of the different mutations, CYP2D6 cDNAs containing all eight combinations of the mutations were created. Expression of the cDNAs in COS-1 cells revealed that the CYP2D6 17 enzyme displayed only 20% of the wild-type (CYP2D6 1) activity, whereas the T107I substitution on its own had no significant effect on enzyme function. Expression in yeast showed that the three possible single amino-acid mutant CYP2D6 variants all had properties similar to CYP2D6 1 when the kinetics of bufuralol hydroxylation was examined. However, enzymes containing both the T107I and R296C mutations exhibited a more than 5-fold higher K(m) for bufuralol than the wild-type enzyme, whereas the S486T mutation was of little importance. In contrast, when codeine was used as a substrate, the T107I substitution alone was sufficient to cause a significant increase in the apparent K(m), indicating a differential effect for this substitution depending on the CYP2D6 substrate. In conclusion, the CYP2D6*17 allele represents the first human cytochrome P450 polymorphic variant in which a combination of substitutions is required to alter the enzyme's catalytic properties and is the first case in which a decreased CYP2D6 activity, as monitored in vivo, has been documented to be caused by an enzyme with altered affinity for CYP2D6 substrates.
