# Characterization of pharmacogenetically relevant CYP2D6 and ABCB1 gene polymorphisms in a Portuguese population sample.

## Metadata
**Authors:** C Correia, P Santos, A M Coutinho, A M Vicente
**Journal:** Cell biochemistry and function
**Year:** 2009
**PMID:** 19405050

## Abstract

Differences in metabolism of drugs can lead to severe toxicity or therapeutic failure. In addition to cytochrome P450 2D6, which plays a critical role in drug metabolism, ABCB1 encoded P-glycoprotein (PGP) is also an important determinant in drug bioavailability. The genes encoding these molecules are highly variable among populations and, given their clinical importance in drug therapy, determining CYP2D6 and ABCB1 allele frequencies in specific populations is very important for useful application in clinical settings. In this study the frequency of the pharmacologically relevant CYP2D6*3, *4, *5, *6 allelic variants and gene duplication, and ABCB1 C1236T and C3435T gene polymorphisms and their haplotypes was determined in a population sample of 100 Portuguese healthy subjects. CYP2D6 allele frequencies were 1.4% (*3), 13.3% (*4), 2.8% (*5), 1.8% (*6) and 6.1% (gene duplication), with 5% of the individuals classified as PM and 8.4% as UM. The frequencies obtained for the non-functional alleles and for the CYP2D6 gene duplication are in agreement with other South European populations, and reinforce the previously suggested south/north gradient of CYP2D6 duplications. Allelic frequencies for the ABCB1 polymorphisms were 52% (3435C) and 54% (1236C) and the most common haplotype (1236C-3435C) occurred with a frequency of 45.5%. Although allele and haplotype frequency data for ABCB1 in Southern Europe is limited, some discrepancies were found with other European populations, with possible therapeutic implications for PGP substrate drugs.
