# Frequency of Common CYP2C9 Polymorphisms and Their Impact on Warfarin Dose Requirement in Pakistani Population.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Aisha Qayyum, Muzammil Hasan Najmi, Qaisar Mansoor, Zia-Ur-Rehman Farooqi, Abdul Khaliq Naveed, Andleeb Hanif, Syed Ali Raza Kazmi, Muhammad Ismail
**Journal:** Clinical and applied thrombosis/hemostasis : official journal of the International Academy of Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis
**Year:** 2017
**PMID:** 27313202

## Abstract

Polymorphisms in cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C9 (CYP2C9) gene result in interindividual variability in warfarin dose requirement. There is a need for characterization of genotype frequency distribution in different populations for construction of customized dosing algorithms to enhance the efficacy and reduce the toxicity of warfarin therapy. This study was carried out in Pakistani population to evaluate the contribution of common CYP2C9 polymorphisms to warfarin therapy. A total of 550 stable patients taking warfarin were enrolled after medical history, physical examination, and laboratory investigations. Single blood sample was collected after informed consent. Genomic DNA was extracted, and genotype analysis for CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 polymorphisms was done by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism assay. A number of samples were also analyzed by direct DNA sequencing for validation of the results. Data were analyzed using SPSS version 20. Genotype frequency distribution of CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 was found to be different from other populations. Of these 2 polymorphisms, CYP2C9*2 did not demonstrate significant effect on warfarin dose requirement, whereas CYP2C9*3 did show significant effect ( P value = .012). It is concluded that there is a need to study genotype frequency distribution and their effect on warfarin dose variability among different populations due to diversity in outcome.
