# Clinical significance of combined CYP2C9 and VKORC1 genotypes in Japanese patients requiring warfarin.

## Metadata
**Authors:** You Miyagata, Kenji Nakai, Yoshiki Sugiyama
**Journal:** International heart journal
**Year:** 2011
**PMID:** 21321468

## Abstract

The individual management of anticoagulation therapy is important for safe medical outcomes, including those of oral surgery. Here, Japanese patients who received warfarin (n = 35) and normal controls (n = 125) were analyzed by real-time PCR to determine the frequencies of single nucleotide polymorphisms in VKORC1 (vitamin K epoxide reductase complex, subunit 1) and CYP2C9 and how these frequencies related to warfarin dose and PT-INR. The genetic polymorphisms CYP2C9(*2) (416 C > T), CYP2C9(*3) (1061 A > C), and intron 1-136 C > T in VKORC1 (1173 C > T) were measured. All patients had the wild-type CYP2C9 gene (*1/*1). All 160 cases had the wild-type (CC) type CYP2C9(*2), 93.8% had AA type CYP2C9(*3), 6.2% had AC type CYP2C9(*3), 1.2% had CC type VKORC1, 13.8% had CT type VKORC1, and 85% had TT type VKORC1. The CC type VKORC1 genetic polymorphism was associated with a significantly higher mean warfarin maintenance dose (4.5 ± 0.5 mg) than other VKORC1 genotypes (TT type 2.9 ± 0.1 mg: CT type 3.4 ± 0.3 mg). Categorization of the patients in terms of the combined CYP2C9 and VKORC1 haplotype (the warfarin-responsive index; WRI) revealed the mean daily warfarin maintenance dose was 3.0 ± 0.1 mg for WRI 1 and 3.7 ± 0.3 mg for WRI 2 (P < 0.012). The event survey revealed 2 patients with nonfatal cerebral hemorrhage had a WRI score of 2 (VKORC1 C/T heterozygosity genotype). Thus, CYP2C9 and VKORC1 haplotype analysis allows prediction of warfarin maintenance dosage. The findings may provide a personalized use of warfarin in the field of oral surgery.
