# Effects of ethnicity and vitamin D supplementation on vitamin D status and changes in bone mineral content in infants.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Steven A Abrams, Keli M Hawthorne, Stefanie P Rogers, Penni D Hicks, Thomas O Carpenter
**Journal:** BMC pediatrics
**Year:** 2012
**PMID:** 22248486

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** To evaluate the effects on serum 25(OH)D and bone mineralization of supplementation of breast-fed Hispanic and non-Hispanic Caucasian infants with vitamin D in infants in Houston, Texas.

**METHODS:** We measured cord serum 25(OH)D levels, bone mineral content (BMC), bone mineral density (BMD) and their changes over 3 months of life with 400 IU/day of vitamin D3 supplementation.

**RESULTS:** Cord serum 25(OH)D was significantly lower in Hispanic than non-Hispanic Caucasian infants (16.4 ± 6.5 ng/mL, n = 27, vs 22.3 ± 9.4 n = 22, p = 0.013). Among 38 infants who completed a 3 month vitamin D supplementation intervention, provision of 400 IU/day of vitamin D increased final 25(OH)D to a higher level in non-Hispanic Caucasian compared to Hispanic infants. There was no significant relationship between cord serum 25(OH)D and BMC or BMD in the first week of life (n = 49) or after 3 months of vitamin D supplementation.

**CONCLUSION:** Low cord 25(OH)D levels are seen in Hispanic infants, but their functional significance is uncertain related to bone health in a southern US setting. Daily vitamin D intake of 400 IU during the first months of life appears adequate to increase serum 25(OH)D and support BMC increases despite low initial 25(OH)D levels in some infants.

**TRIAL REGISTRATION:** ClincalTrials.gov NCT00697294.
