# The influence of cytochrome oxidase CYP2A6, CYP2B6, and CYP2C9 polymorphisms on the plasma concentrations of valproic acid in epileptic patients.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Lan Tan, Jin-Tai Yu, Yan-Ping Sun, Jiang-Rong Ou, Jing-Hui Song, Yang Yu
**Journal:** Clinical neurology and neurosurgery
**Year:** 2010
**PMID:** 20089352

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVES:** To investigate influences of the functional polymorphisms of Cytochrome P450 isozymes 2A6 (CYP2A6), 2B6 (CYP2B6), and 2C9 (CYP2C9) on pharmacokinetics of VPA in vivo.

**PATIENTS AND METHODS:** In the study, we analyzed the genotypes of CYP2A6, CYP2B6, and CYP2C9 and their contribution to the steady-state standardized plasma VPA concentrations in 179 subjects with epilepsy of a Northern Han Chinese population. The genotypes were detected by the polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP).

**RESULTS:** The subjects with one or two variant CYP2A6*4 alleles showed higher mean plasma VPA concentrations compared with non-*4 alleles [(3.4+/-0.4)microg kg ml(-1)mg(-1) vs. (3.6+/-0.4)microg kg ml(-1)mg(-1), p=0.0055]. A significant difference [one-way ANOVA (p=0.0203)] was also found between mean plasma VPA concentrations and the CYP2B6 genotypes. In addition, subjects with the heterozygous genotype CYP2C9*3 had higher mean plasma VPA concentrations than did those subjects with the wild-type genotype [(3.9+/-0.4)microg kg ml(-1)mg(-1) vs. (3.4+/-0.4)microg kg ml(-1)mg(-1), p=0.0001].

**CONCLUSION:** The presently evaluated variant alleles in the CYP2A6, CYP2B6, and CYP2C9 genes may explain part of the substantial variability in VPA pharmacokinetics between different subjects.
