# The effect of CYP2C9, VKORC1 genotypes and old age on warfarin pharmacologic sensitivity in korean patients with thromboembolic disease.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Hee-Won Moon, Jaekwang Noh, Yeo-Min Yun, Hahn Young Kim, Ik Jin Yun, Junghan Song, Jin Q Kim
**Journal:** Annals of clinical and laboratory science
**Year:** 2011
**PMID:** 22075505

## Abstract

The therapeutic dose of warfarin is dependent upon intrinsic patient characteristics that are highly variable. We assessed the effects of CYP2C9, VKORC1 1173 C/T polymorphisms, and old age on warfarin dosing and sensitivity by measuring plasma S-/R-warfarin levels in Korean patients. INR and the plasma S-/R-warfarin concentrations were determined in 58 patients who had the VKORC1 1173C/T CYP2C9 genotypes, were on a long-term anticoagulation regimen with warfarin, and took a daily dose of warfarin. The pharmacokinetic sensitivity of warfarin was significantly higher in the CYP2C9 *1/*3 genotypes than in the CYP2C9 *1/*1 genotypes [ratio of S-warfarin concentration/dose, 0.53 vs. 0.21; p=0.01]. Pharmacodynamic sensitivity in older patients (≥ 75 years) with the CYP2C9 *1/*1 and VKORC1 1173 TT genotypes was significantly higher as compared to younger patients (<75 years) [Ratio of INR/S-warfarin concentration, 4.88 vs. 3.41; p = 0.026]. The CYP2C9*3 allele and old age (≥ 75 years) with the VKORC1 1173 T allele were also associated with increased risk of over-anticoagulation. The increase of over-anticoagulation risk and warfarin sensitivity is related to the CYP2C9*3 allele and old age with the VKORC1 1173 T allele in Korean patients with thromboembolic disease. These findings suggest that a lower initial and maintenance dose should be considered for the patients with CYP2C9 *3 allele and advanced age in this patient population. However, due to the limited number of patients in the study population, our finding needs to be confirmed by a larger, well-controlled study.
