# CYP2C9 3 and 13 alleles significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of irbesartan in healthy Korean subjects.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Chang-Ik Choi, Mi-Jeong Kim, Eun-Kyung Chung, Hye-In Lee, Choon-Gon Jang, Jung-Woo Bae, Seok-Yong Lee
**Journal:** European journal of clinical pharmacology
**Year:** 2012
**PMID:** 21842338

## Abstract

**PURPOSE:** To evaluate the effects of two major polymorphisms of CYP2C9, CYP2C9 3 and CYP2C9 13, on the pharmacokinetics of irbesartan in healthy Korean volunteers.

**METHODS:** A single 150-mg oral dose of irbesartan was given to 28 Korean volunteers, who had different CYP2C9 genotypes (12, 10, and 6 carriers of CYP2C9 1/ 1, 1/ 3, and 1/13 genotypes respectively). Irbesartan levels were analyzed using HPLC fluorescence in plasma samples collected up to 36 h after the drug intake.

**RESULTS:** Compared with CYP2C9 1 homozygous subjects, not only were the maximum plasma concentrations (C(max)) of irbesartan in CYP2C9 1/ 3 and 1/ 13 subjects 1.56- and 1.50-fold higher (P = 0.001), but the half-lives were also 1.38- and 1.50-fold longer (P = 0.001). The area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) was 1.64- and 1.79-fold higher (P < 0.001). The oral clearance of irbesartan was 39.3% and 44.0% lower in the CYP2C9 1/ 3 and 1/ 13 subjects respectively, than in the 1/ 1 subjects (P < 0.001). Likewise, the increases in half-life and decreases in oral clearance observed in CYP2C9 1/ 13 individuals were similar to those in participants expressing the CYP2C9 1/ 3 genotype.

**CONCLUSIONS:** CYP2C9 genetic polymorphisms markedly affected the pharmacokinetics of irbesartan in this study sample. The CYP2C9 3 and CYP2C9 13 alleles appear to be associated with the decreased metabolism of irbesartan.
