# Interaction of CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 genotypes modifies the risk for nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs-related acute gastrointestinal bleeding.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Gerardo Blanco, Carmen Martínez, Jose M Ladero, Elena Garcia-Martin, Carlos Taxonera, Francisco G Gamito, Manuel Diaz-Rubio, Jose A G Agundez
**Journal:** Pharmacogenetics and genomics
**Year:** 2008
**PMID:** 18216720

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVES:** To analyze whether gene variants leading to impaired drug metabolism are related with acute gastrointestinal bleeding after nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID) use.

**METHODS:** Common CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 polymorphisms were studied in a cross-sectional study, involving 134 NSAID-related bleeding patients and in 177 patients receiving NSAID with no adverse effects.

**RESULTS:** Among patients receiving NSAID that are CYP2C8/9 substrates the frequencies for carriers of variant alleles versus control patients were CYP2C8*3: 0.50 vs. 0.23 [odds ratio (OR); 95% confidence interval (CI)=3.4; 1.5-7.5; P=0.002], CYP2C9*2: 0.48 vs. 0.26 (OR; 95% CI=2.7; 1.2-5.8; P=0.013) and CYP2C9*3: 0.24 vs. 0.20 (OR; 95% CI=1.3; 0.5-3.1; P=0.578). The frequencies for carriers of the CYP2C8*3+CYP2C9*2 genotype were 0.40 vs. 0.15 (OR; 95% CI=3.7; 1.6-8.9; P=0.003). These findings were not influenced by sex, age, smoking or drinking habits. Among bleeding patients receiving NSAID that are not extensively metabolized by CYP2C8/9, no differences in genotypes or allele frequencies were observed as compared with control patients.

**CONCLUSION:** The combined presence of CYP2C8*3 and CYP2C9*2 (CYP2C8*3+CYP2C9*2 genotype), is a relevant determinant in the risk to develop gastrointestinal bleeding in patients receiving NSAID that are CYP2C8/9 substrates.
