# CYP2C9 and VKORC1 polymorphisms influence warfarin dose variability in patients on long-term anticoagulation.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Paulo Caleb Junior Lima Santos, Carla Luana Dinardo, Isolmar Tadeu Schettert, Renata Alonso Gadi Soares, Liz Kawabata-Yoshihara, Isabela Martins Bensenor, José Eduardo Krieger, Paulo Andrade Lotufo, Alexandre Costa Pereira
**Journal:** European journal of clinical pharmacology
**Year:** 2013
**PMID:** 22990331

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVES:** The main aim of this study was to determine whether CYP2C9 and VKORC1 polymorphisms influence warfarin dose variability during initial dose-finding phase and during maintenance treatment after 360 days.

**METHODS:** Two hundred and six consecutive patients who were beginning warfarin therapy were selected. They were assessed for general and clinical characteristics; prescribed warfarin dose; response to therapy on days 7-10, 30, 60, 180, and 360; adverse events; and CYP2C9 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 11, and VKORC1 1639G >A assays.

**RESULTS:** During the first 30 days of anticoagulation, the relative variability of warfarin dose was significantly associated with CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 polymorphisms (p = 0.02) and with VKORC1 1639G >A genotypes (p = 0.04). Warfarin variability was also statistically different according to predicted metabolic phenotype and to VKORC1 genotypes after 360 days of treatment, and in the phase between 180 and 360 days (long-term dose variability). Both CYP2C9 and VKORC1 polymorphisms were associated with the international normalized ratio (INR) made between 7 and 10 days/initial dose ratio, adjusted for covariates (p < 0.01 and p = 0.02, respectively). Patients carrying VKORC1 and CYP2C9 variants presented lower required dose (at the end of follow-up of 360 days) compared to patients carrying wild-type genotypes (p = 0.04 and p = 0.03, respectively).

**CONCLUSIONS:** Genetic information on CYP2C9 and VKORC1 is important both for the initial dose-finding phase and during maintenance treatment with warfarin.
