# Quantification of In Vivo Metabolic Activity of CYP2D6 Genotypes and Alleles Through Population Pharmacokinetic Analysis of Vortioxetine.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Trine Frederiksen, Johan Areberg, Ellen Schmidt, Tore Bjerregaard Stage, Kim Brøsen
**Journal:** Clinical pharmacology and therapeutics
**Year:** 2021
**PMID:** 32599653

## Abstract

Assignment of CYP2D6 phenotype from genotype data can be challenging and despite efforts to standardize translation, there is currently no universally accepted method. To facilitate standardization, there remains a need to precisely quantify the in vivo function of different CYP2D6 genotypes. Vortioxetine is metabolized to its major metabolite, Lu AA34443, primarily via CYP2D6. The aim of this study was to quantify the in vivo CYP2D6 activity of different CYP2D6 alleles and genotypes through population pharmacokinetic (PopPK) modeling of vortioxetine and Lu AA34443. Plasma concentration data of vortioxetine and Lu AA34443 from 1,140 subjects originating from 29 clinical pharmacology studies were pooled for the analysis. A joint PopPK model described the pharmacokinetics of vortioxetine and Lu AA34443 simultaneously and provided estimates of the CYP2D6-mediated metabolism for each subject. Subjects normally classified as CYP2D6 intermediate metabolizers (IMs) showed different levels of CYP2D6 activity with carriers of one fully functional allele and one null function allele having 77% higher CYP2D6 activity compared with carriers of two decreased function alleles (P < 0.0001). The decreased function alleles were associated with different levels of reduction of CYP2D6 activity. Fixing the activity of fully functional alleles to 1.0, the relative activities of CYP2D6*9, CYP2D6*10, CYP2D6*17, and CYP2D6*41 were 0.22, 0.37, 0.17, and 0.21, respectively. The activity of CYP2D6*10 was shown to be significantly greater than that of CYP2D6*17 (P = 0.01) and CYP2D6*41 (P = 0.02). These results warrant further discussion of current CYP2D6 genotype-phenotype classification systems particularly regarding decreased function alleles and the IM phenotype.
