# Functional analysis of CYP2D6.31 variant: homology modeling suggests possible disruption of redox partner interaction by Arg440His substitution.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Delphine Allorge, Didier Bréant, Jacky Harlow, Joey Chowdry, Jean-Marc Lo-Guidice, Dany Chevalier, Christelle Cauffiez, Michel Lhermitte, Frank E Blaney, Geoffrey T Tucker, Franck Broly, S Wynne Ellis
**Journal:** Proteins
**Year:** 2005
**PMID:** 15726636

## Abstract

Cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) is an important human drug-metabolizing enzyme that exhibits a marked genetic polymorphism. Numerous CYP2D6 alleles have been characterized at a functional level, although the consequences for expression and/or catalytic activity of a substantial number of rare variants remain to be investigated. One such allele, CYP2D6*31, is characterized by mutations encoding three amino acid substitutions: Arg296Cys, Arg440His and Ser486Thr. The identification of this allele in an individual with an apparent in vivo poor metabolizer phenotype prompted us to analyze the functional consequence of these substitutions on enzyme activity using yeast as a heterologous expression system. We demonstrated that the Arg440His substitution, alone or in combination with Arg296Cys and/or Ser486Thr, altered the respective kinetic parameters [Km (microM) and kcat (min(-1))] of debrisoquine 4-hydroxylation (wild-type, 25; 0.92; variants, 43-68; 0.05-0.11) and dextromethorphan O-demethylation (wild-type, 1; 4.72; variants, 12-23; 0.64-1.43), such that their specificity constants (kcat/Km) were decreased by more than 95% compared to those observed with the wild-type enzyme. The rates of oxidation of rac-metoprolol at single substrate concentrations of 40 and 400 microM were also markedly decreased by approximately 90% with each CYP2D6 variant containing the Arg440His substitution. These in vitro data confirm that the CYP2D6*31 allele encodes an enzyme with a severely impaired but residual catalytic activity and, furthermore, that the Arg440His exchange alone is the inactivating mutation. A homology model of CYP2D6 based on the crystal structure of rabbit CYP2C5 locates Arg440 on the proximal surface of the protein. Docking the structure of the FMN domain of human cytochrome P450 reductase to the CYP2D6 model suggests that Arg440 is a key member of a cluster of basic amino acid residues important for reductase binding.
