# mtDNA mutations, hearing loss and aminoglycoside treatment in Mexicans.

## Metadata
**Authors:** G Meza, N M Torres-Ruíz, C Tirado-Gutiérrez, P Aguilera
**Journal:** Brazilian journal of otorhinolaryngology
**Year:** 2011
**PMID:** 22030963

## Abstract

**UNLABELLED:** Streptomycin and aminoglycoside derivatives are commonly used to treat tuberculosis and other stubborn infections; these drugs may alter auditory and/or vestibular function. Mutations in mitochondrial DNA have been associated with hypersensitivity to aminoglycosides; no studies have been conducted in Mexicans, which are very prone to such alterations because aminoglycosides have been prescribed carelessly for many years, irrespective of the ailment to be treated.

**AIM:** We investigated "hot spot" mutations described previously as causing inner ear alterations.

**METHODS:** Hot spot mutations at the 12S rRNA gene and the tRNA Serine (UCN) gene were screened by PCR-RFLP and sequencing in 65 subjects undergoing audiological and vestibular testing.

**STUDY DESIGN:** Experimental.

**RESULTS:** 32 individuals had healthy auditory and vestibular function, whereas 33 subjects had auditory affections. We found none of the previously reported mutations related to aminoglycoside hypersensitivity, or non-syndromic hearing loss. Two hearing-impaired patients that had been treated with streptomycin had the T1189C variant of the mitochondrial 12S rRNA region.

**CONCLUSION:** Mutations related to hearing loss in other ethnic backgrounds were not found in Mexicans. However, the T1189C variant is possibly a putative mutation related to aminoglycoside hypersensitivity and was present in 2 patients.
