# Pharmacogenetic and Clinical Predictors of Response to Clopidogrel plus Aspirin after Acute Coronary Syndrome in Egyptians

## Metadata
**Authors:** Shaimaa Fathy, Mohamed H Shahin, Taimour Langaee, Basma M Khalil, Ayman Saleh, Nagwa A Sabry, Mona F Schaalan, Lamiaa L El Wakeel, Larisa H Cavallari
**Journal:** Pharmacogenetics and genomics
**Date:** 2018 Sep
**DOI:** [10.1097/FPC.0000000000000349](https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0000000000000349)
**PMID:** 30188374
**PMCID:** PMC9903350
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9903350/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9903350/pdf/nihms-1867799.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9903350/pdf/nihms-1867799.pdf)

## Abstract

**Objectives:** 
Dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) with aspirin and clopidogrel reduces the risk for recurrent cardiovascular events after acute coronary syndrome (ACS). However, there is significant variation in response to DAPT that may be influenced by both genetic and non-genetic factors. This study aimed to assess the effect of genetic polymorphisms in PON1, PEAR-1, P2Y12, CES1 and CYP2C19 along with clinical, demographic, and social factors, on variation in response to DAPT in Egyptians.

**Participants and methods:** 
This study included 230 Egyptian patients treated with clopidogrel 75 mg/day and aspirin 81 mg/day for at least 12 months following their first ACS. Simple and multivariable logistic regression analysese were carried out to identify factors associated with major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE), defined as the occurrence of recurrent ACS, ischemic stroke, stent-related revascularization, or death, in clopidogrel-treated participants.

**Results:** 
Using multivariable logistic regression analysis, the CYP2C19*2 polymorphism was the only genetic predictor of MACE [odds ratio (OR): 2.23, 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.15–4.33, P=0.01]. In addition, proton pump inhibitor (PPI) use (OR 4.77, 95% CI: 1.47 – 15.54, p=0.009) and diabetes (OR 1.83, 95% CI: 1.03 – 3.26, p=0.03) were associated with higher cardiovascular risk, while statin use was associated with lower risk (OR 0.43, 95% CI: 0.25 – 0.76, p=0.003). The contribution of these four genetic and non-genetic factors explained 19% of the variability in risk for MACE in Egyptians treated with DAPT.

**Conclusion:** 
These results highlight that CYP2C19*2, along with diabetes, and use of PPI and statins are important factors jointly associated with variability in clinical response to DAPT following ACS in Egyptians.

Keywords: Clopidogrel, aspirin, dual antiplatelet, Egyptians, P2RY12, CES1, CYP2C19

### Objectives:

Dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) with aspirin and clopidogrel reduces the risk for recurrent cardiovascular events after acute coronary syndrome (ACS). However, there is significant variation in response to DAPT that may be influenced by both genetic and non-genetic factors. This study aimed to assess the effect of genetic polymorphisms in *PON1*, *PEAR-1*, *P2Y12*, *CES1* and *CYP2C19* along with clinical, demographic, and social factors, on variation in response to DAPT in Egyptians.

### Participants and methods:

This study included 230 Egyptian patients treated with clopidogrel 75 mg/day and aspirin 81 mg/day for at least 12 months following their first ACS. Simple and multivariable logistic regression analysese were carried out to identify factors associated with major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE), defined as the occurrence of recurrent ACS, ischemic stroke, stent-related revascularization, or death, in clopidogrel-treated participants.

### Results:

Using multivariable logistic regression analysis, the CYP2C19*2 polymorphism was the only genetic predictor of MACE [odds ratio (OR): 2.23, 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.15–4.33, P=0.01]. In addition, proton pump inhibitor (PPI) use (OR 4.77, 95% CI: 1.47 – 15.54, p=0.009) and diabetes (OR 1.83, 95% CI: 1.03 – 3.26, p=0.03) were associated with higher cardiovascular risk, while statin use was associated with lower risk (OR 0.43, 95% CI: 0.25 – 0.76, p=0.003). The contribution of these four genetic and non-genetic factors explained 19% of the variability in risk for MACE in Egyptians treated with DAPT.

### Conclusion:

These results highlight that *CYP2C19*2*, along with diabetes, and use of PPI and statins are important factors jointly associated with variability in clinical response to DAPT following ACS in Egyptians.

## Introduction

Dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) with aspirin and clopidogrel is commonly prescribed to reduce the risk for cardiovascular events after acute coronary syndrome (ACS) [[1](#R1)] or percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI).[[2](#R2),[3](#R3)] However, inter-individual variation in platelet response to aspirin and clopidogrel has been well-documented.[[4](#R4),[5](#R5)] Clopidogrel resistance has been used to reflect the failure of clopidogrel to achieve its effect on antiplatelet aggregation,[[6](#R6)] which eventually may lead to poor cardiovascular outcomes. This resistance and variability in inhibition of platelet activity may be influenced by non-genetic factors or polymorphisms in genes encoding for proteins participating in clopidogrel pharmacokinetics (e.g., cytochrome P450 2C19 (*CYP2C19*), carboxylesterase 1 (*CES1*), and paraoxonase-1 (*PON1*)) or pharmacodynamics (e.g., purinergic receptor P2Y12 (*P2RY12*), and platelet endothelial aggregation receptor-1 (*PEAR1*)).[[7](#R7),[8](#R8)]

The CYP2C19 enzyme plays a critical role in the bioactivation of clopidogrel. Over the past decade, studies have provided strong evidence of the association between *CYP2C19* single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and variability in the efficacy of clopidogrel therapy, particularly after PCI.[[9](#R9)-[11](#R11)] For instance, *CYP2C19**2 (c.681 G>A; rs4244285), the most common *CYP2C19* no-function polymorphism, has been associated with lower plasma levels of the clopidogrel active metabolite, reduced antiplatelet effect, and increased risk of cardiovascular events compared to non-carriers.[[9](#R9),[12](#R12),[13](#R13)] *CYP2C19*4* is another loss-of-function genetic polymorphism that was detected previously in Caucasians and Chinese cohorts with a frequency ~ 0.6% and in the Ashkenazi Jewish population with a frequency ~2%[[14](#R14)-[16](#R16)]. Scott et al. [[16](#R16)] suggested that *CYP2C19*4* occurs on a *CYP2C19*17* background and together, *CYP2C19*4* and *CYP2C19*17* form a haplotype that may alter the interpretation of *CYP2C19* genotyping if not considered. Given that *CYP2C19*4* is present in Ashkenazi individuals and that Ashkenazi Jewish individuals have ancestry intermediate between European and Middle-eastern populations [[17](#R17),[18](#R18)], we sought to test this SNP in Egyptians to investigate its presence and impact on clopidogrel response in this population. In support of this, we previously found that the *VKORC1* Asp36Tyr variant, which is common in Jews of African descent and in Ashkenazi Jews, but rare in other populations, was an important determinant of warfarin dose variability in Egyptians [[19](#R19)].

In addition to *CYP2C19* genetic polymorpshims, clinical factors and other genetic factors (e.g. SNPs in *PEAR-1*, *CES1*, *PON1*, and *P2RY12* genes) have been previously shown to be associated with platelet aggregation and cardiovascular outcomes in patients treated with clopidogrel plus aspirin ([Table 1](#T1)).[[20](#R20),[21](#R21)] However, these results have not been consistently replicated. The effect of genetic polymorphisms and clinical factors on response to DAPT has been predominately studied in populations of European or Asian ancestry.[[22](#R22),[23](#R23)] However, very little is known about the influence of such factors on the response to DAPT in Egyptians. We recently reported *CYP2C19**2 genetic polymorphism as an important predictor associated with variability in response to clopidogrel therapy in Egyptians.[[24](#R24)] Herein, we extended the study population to identify additional genetic and clinical factors associated with variability in response to DAPT with clopidogrel plus aspirin in Egyptian patients with ACS.

### Table 1.

| SNP | References |
| --- | --- |
| CYP2C19*2 (rs4244285 C>T) | Levine et al. [1], Degrauwe et al. [2], Steg et al. [3], Wurtz and Grove [4], Angiolillo et al. [5], Nguyen et al. [6] |
| CYP2C19*3 (rs4986893 G>A) | Nguyen et al. [6], Simon et al. [7], Karazniewicz-Lada et al. [8], Mega et al. [9], Sofi et al. [10], Shahin et al. [11] |
| CYP2C19*4 (rs28399504 A>G) | Shuldiner et al. [12], Simon et al. [13] |
| CYP2C19*17 (rs11188072 C>T) | Nguyen et al. [6], Ferguson et al. [14], Garcia-Barcelo et al. [15] |
| P2Y12 (rs2046934 C>T) | Scott et al. [16], Atzmon et al. [17] |
| PEAR-1 (rs12041331 G>A) | Kopelman et al. [18] |
| PON-1 (rs662 T>C) | Shahin et al. [19] |
| CES1 (rs3815583 T>G) | Lewis et al. [20], Yao et al. [21] |
| CES1 (rs2244613 C>A) | Notarangelo et al. [22] |

Table 1 Caption: SNPs tested in the study

## Participants and Methods

### Study design and population

We designed an observational case-control study to identify genetic and clinical factors associated with cardiovascular outcomes among Egyptian patients with ACS receiving DAPT with aspirin plus clopidogrel. Between January 2014 and June 2015, 230 patients were enrolled from the National Heart Institute, Ain Shams Specialized Hospital, or El-Demerdash Hospital. Eligible patients were those with established coronary artery disease defined by a history of ACS (unstable angina or ST-elevation or non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction) or revascularization (any PCI or coronary-artery bypass grafting), with consequent exposure to clopidogrel 75 mg per day and aspirin 81 mg per day for 12 months. The outcome of interest was the occurrence of a major adverse cardiac event (MACE), defined as the occurrence of recurrent ACS, ischemic stroke, stent-related revascularization, or death during DAPT with aspirin plus clopidogrel. Patients taking clopidogrel for a non-cardiac indication, such as stroke prophylaxis, advanced hepatic or renal disease, significant valvular disease or active pathological bleeding (e.g., gastrointestinal bleeding) were excluded.

Within this cohort of patients, controls were defined as patients who did not experience any MACE during 12 months of clopidogrel plus aspirin therapy. We refer to this group as No-MACE group. Cases were defined as patients who experienced a MACE event within 12 months of DAPT with clopidogrel plus aspirin (MACE group). The following information was collected for each patient from their medical record: age, sex, body weight, height, cigarette smoking status, medical history and medications. A whole blood sample was collected from each patient for DNA extraction and genotyping. The study protocol was approved by the Research Ethics Committee at Faculty of Pharmacy, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt, and all participating patients provided written informed consent.

### Genotyping procedure

Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes using the automated QIAcube device (QIAGEN, Cairo, Egypt) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. Genotyping for *CES1* (rs3815583) and (rs2244613), *P2Y12* (rs2046943), and *CYP2C19***4* (rs28399504), *CYP2C19*2* (rs4244285), *CYP2C19*3* (rs4986893), and *CYP2C19*17* (rs12248560) variants was performed using PCR followed by pyrosequencing. The *PEAR-1* (rs12041331) and *PON1* (rs662) polymorphisms were genotyped by Taqman^®^ assay as recommended by the manufacturer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, New Yor City, New Yor, USA). The standard PCR reaction mixture used for amplification of the target sequence consisted of 12.5 μl including 6.5 μl of ABI PCR master mix with Taq DNA polymerase for all the SNPs except *CES1* for which HotStarTaq Master Mix Kit (Cat. No. 203445) was used, 1 μl of each primer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California), 2 μl of water for DNA, and 2 μl of genomic DNA.

### Statistical Analysis

Chi-square and Fisher's exact tests were used to compare the allele and genotype frequencies between cases and controls. Descriptive analysis was used to compare allele frequencies between the Egyptian population and published data of other populations. Numerical variables were represented as mean ± standard deviation. Categorical variables were presented as percentages. Hardy–Weinberg Equilibrium was tested by allele counting and χ^2^ analyses with one degree of freedom. Univariate analysis was used to compare the quantitative dependent factors between the MACE (cases) and No-MACE (controls) groups. A two-sided p-value of less than 0.05 was used to indicate statistical significance. Simple logistic regression was performed to identify the factors associated with MACE in clopidogrel-treated participants. Variables associated with clinical outcome with a p-value < 0.05 on simple logistic regression analysis were included in a multiple logistic regression analysis to identify factors jointly associated with MACE. Results from the logistic regression analysis were described as odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CI). All statistical analyses were carried out using SPSS software (version 17.0 for Windows; SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois, USA) and SAS (version 9.3; SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina, USA).

## Results

The characteristics of the 230 study participants are presented in [Table 2](#T2). Study participants had a mean age of 56.2 ± 9.1 years, a mean BMI of 29.8 ± 3.7 kg/m2, 67.8% were male, and 52.2% underwent a PCI. A total of 114 (49.5%) participants had a MACE after 12 months of DAPT and constituted the MACE group. The control group consisted of 116 (50.5%) participants who did not experience any MACE. Compared to the No-MACE group, the MACE group had a higher prevalence of diabetes, angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) use, and proton pump inhibitor (PPI) use. Omeprazole was the sole PPI used ([Table 2](#T2)). Conversely, statin use was more common in the No-MACE group; atorvastatin was the sole statin taken by study participants. Other characteristics were similar between groups.

### Table 2.

| Characteristics | MACE Group(n=114) | No MACE Group(n=116) | P-value |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Mean age, years (SD) | 57.0 (8.8) | 55.4 (9.3) | 0.18 |
| Male gender, n (%) | 82 (71.9%) | 74 (63.7%) | 0.18 |
| Current Smoker, n (%) | 35 (30.7%) | 25 (21.5%) | 0.11 |
| BMI Kg/m2, mean (SD) | 30.1 (3.5) | 29.5 (3.7) | 0.18 |
| Medical history * |   |   |   |
| Diabetes Mellitus, n (%) | 66 (57.8%) | 41 (35.3%) | 0.0006 |
| Hypertension, n (%) | 84 (73.6%) | 96 (82.7%) | 0.10 |
| Percutaneous Coronary Intervention, n (%) | 59 (51.7%) | 61 (52.5%) | 0.90 |
| Concomitant medication † |   |   |   |
| Statin‡, n (%) | 43 (37.7%) | 69 (59.4%) | 0.0009 |
| Proton Pump Inhibitor‡, n (%) | 18 (15.7%) | 4 (3.4%) | 0.001 |
| Calcium Channel Blocker, n (%) | 41 (35.9%) | 49 (42.2%) | 0.33 |
| Beta-blocker, n (%) | 58 (50.8%) | 66 (56.8%) | 0.36 |
| Diuretics, n (%) | 19 (16.6%) | 22 (18.9%) | 0.65 |
| ACE inhibitor or Angiotensin Receptor Blocker, n (%) | 36 (31.5%) | 23 (19.8%) | 0.04 |

Table 2 Caption: Baseline demographics of study participants.

The genotyping results are illustrated in [Tables 3](#T3) and [4](#T4). None of the tested polymorphisms had a frequency that deviated from Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium. Comparing the minor allele frequencies (MAFs) of the SNPs tested with those reported in African, Asian or European populations revealed significant differences in MAF patterns between Egyptians and other continental populations. For instance, the frequency of the PEAR1 (rs12041331) A-allele in Egyptians was significantly higher than that reported in Africans, East Asians, and Europeans. The MAFs of *PON-1* (rs662) and *CES1* (rs3815583) in Egyptians were close to Europeans, but significantly different from African and East Asian populations. On the other hand, the MAF of *CES1* (rs2244613) was similar to that reported in Africans, but different from frequencies reported in East Asians and Europeans.

### Table 3.

| SNP | Genotype | Egyptians | African* | Asian*† | European* |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| PEAR1 (rs12041331) | G>A | A = 77%G = 23% | A = 47%G = 53% | A = 46%G = 54% | A = 9%G = 91% |
| P2Y12 (rs2046934) | C>T | T = 94%C = 6% | T = 87%C = 13% | T = 85%C = 15% | T = 83%C = 17% |
| PON-1 (rs662) | T>C | T = 66%C = 34% | T = 25%C = 75% | T = 33%C = 67% | T = 71%C = 29% |
| CES1 (rs3815583) | T>G | T = 81%G = 19% | T = 70%G = 30% | T = 55%G = 45% | T = 82%G = 18% |
| CES1 (rs2244613) | C>A | A = 75%C = 25% | A = 75%C = 25% | A = 40%C = 60% | A = 84%C = 16% |
| CYP2C19*4 (rs28399504) | A>G | A = 100%G = 0% | A = 100%G = 0% | A = 100%G = 0% | A = 100%G = 0% |

Table 3 Caption: Comparison of minor allele frequencies of studied genetic polymorphisms in Egyptians compared to other populations

### Table 4.

| SNP | Genotype | MACE(n=114) | NO-MACE(n=116) | Overall(n=230) | P-value† | HWEp-value‡ |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| CYP2C19*2 (rs4244285 C>T) | C/C | 79 (69.3) | 94 (81.1) | 173 (75.2) | 0.03* | 0.97 |
|   | C/T | 33 (28.9) | 20 (17.2) | 53 (23.1) |   |  |
| T/T | 2 (1.8) | 2 (1.7) | 4 (1.7) |  |  |  |
| CYP2C19*3 (rs4986893 G>A) | G/G | 113 (99.1) | 116 (100) | 229 (99.6) | 0.49 | 0.97 |
|   | G/A | 1 (0.9) | 0 (0) | 1 (0.4) |   |  |
| A/A | 0 (0) | 0 (0) | 0 (0) |  |  |  |
| CYP2C19*17 (rs11188072 C>T) | CC | 87 (76.3) | 81 (69.8) | 168 (73.0) | 0.17 | 0.08 |
|   | CT | 21 (18.4) | 32 (27.6) | 53 (23.0) |   |  |
| TT | 6 (5.3) | 3 (2.6) | 9 (4.0) |  |  |  |
| PEAR1 (rs12041331 G>A) | G/G | 65 (57.0) | 76 (65.5) | 141 (61.3) | 0.38 | 0.22 |
|   | A/G | 39 (35.1) | 35 (332.2) | 73 (32.2) |   |  |
| A/A | 9 (7.9) | 6 (6.5) | 15 (6.5) |  |  |  |
| P2Y12 (rs2046934 C>T) | T/T | 102 (89.5) | 99 (85.3) | 201 (87.4) | 0.35* | 0.98 |
|   | C/T | 12 (10.5) | 16 (13.8) | 28 (12.2) |   |  |
| C/C | 0 (0) | 1 (0.9) | 1 (0.4) |  |  |  |
| PON-1 (rs662 T>C) | C/C | 11 (9.7) | 20 (17.2) | 31 (13.5) | 0.28 | 0.10 |
|   | T/C | 47 (41.2) | 44 (37.9) | 91 (39.5) |   |  |
| T/T | 56 (49.1) | 52 (44.8) | 108 (47.0) |  |  |  |
| CES1 (rs3815583 T>G) | T/T | 74 (64.9) | 72 (62.1) | 146 (63.5) | 0.65* | 0.13 |
|   | T/G | 39 (34.2) | 40 (34.5) | 79 (34.3) |   |  |
| G/G | 1 (1.0) | 4 (3.4) | 5 (2.2) |  |  |  |
| CES1 (rs2244613 C>A) | A/A | 68 (59.6) | 61 (52.6) | 129 (56.1) | 0.54 | 0.22 |
|   | A/C | 41 (36.0) | 50 (43.1) | 91 (39.6) |   |   |
|   | C/C | 5 (4.4) | 5 (4.3) | 10 (4.3) |   |   |
| CYP2C19*4 (rs28399504 A>G) | A/A | 98 (100) | 106 (100) | 204 (100) | NA | NA |
|   | A/G | 0 (0) | 0 (0) | 0 (0) |   |  |
| G/G | 0 (0) | 0 (0) | 0 (0) |  |  |  |

Table 4 Caption: Distribution of the studied genetic polymorphisms in MACE and NO-MACE patients

The distribution of the studied genetic polymorphisms in MACE and No-MACE participants is illustrated in [Table 4](#T4). Similar to what we have previously reported,[[24](#R24)] we found that *CYP2C19**2 variant carriers (T-allele) had more MACE events compared to non-carriers (p=0.03). None of the other tested genetic polymorphisms differed significantly in frequency between MACE and No-MACE groups.

In simple logistic regression analysis ([Table 5](#T5)), PPI use, ACE inhibitor or ARB use, diabetes, and *CYP2C19**2 genotype were associated with increased risk of MACE. On the contrary, statin use was associated with decreased risk for MACE. In multiple logistic regression analysis, ACE inhibitor or ARB use was no longer significantly associated with MACE; however, PPI use, statin use, diabetes, and *CYP2C19**2 remained significantly associated with MACE ([Table 6](#T6)). Carriers of one *CYP2C19**2 allele had an odds of having MACE of 2.23 (95% CI: 1.15 – 4.33) compared to non-carriers (p=0.018). PPI use (OR 4.77, 95% CI: 1.47 –15.54, p=0.009), and being diabetic (OR 1.83, 95% CI: 1.03 – 3.26, p=0.039) also increased the risk of MACE in DAPT treated participants, while the use of statins decreased the risk of having MACE (OR 0.43, 95% CI: 0.25 – 0.76, p=0.003). Together, the four significant genetic and non-genetic factors displayed in [Table 6](#T6) explained 19% of the variability of the risk for having MACE while being treated with clopidogrel plus aspirin in Egyptians.

### Table 5.

| Variable | OR | 95% CI | P-value |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Age | 1.02 | 0.99 – 1.05 | 0.18 |
| Gender (Male) | 1.45 | 0.83 – 2.53 | 0.18 |
| Current smoker | 1.61 | 0.89 – 2.92 | 0.11 |
| Body Mass Index | 1.05 | 0.98 – 1.13 | 0.18 |
| Statin use | 0.41 | 0.24 – 0.70 | 0.001 |
| PPI use | 5.25 | 1.71 – 16.05 | 0.004 |
| Calcium Channel Blocker | 0.77 | 0.45 – 1.31 | 0.33 |
| Diuretic | 0.86 | 0.43 – 1.68 | 0.65 |
| ACE inhibitor or Angiotensin Receptor Blocker | 1.87 | 1.02 – 3.41 | 0.04 |
| Beta-blocker | 0.79 | 0.47 – 1.32 | 0.36 |
| Hypertension | 0.58 | 0.31 – 1.10 | 0.10 |
| Percutaneous Coronary Intervention | 0.97 | 0.58 – 1.62 | 0.90 |
| Diabetes Mellitus | 2.52 | 1.48 – 4.28 | 0.0006 |
| CYP2C19*2 | 1.89 | 1.03 – 3.49 | 0.04 |
| CYP2C19*17 * | 0.72 | 0.40 – 1.30 | 0.27 |
| CYP2C19 polymorphisms† | 1.89 | 1.03 – 3.49 | 0.04 |
| PON1 (rs662) | 0.84 | 0.50 – 1.41 | 0.51 |
| PEAR1 (rs12041331) | 1.40 | 0.82 – 2.40 | 0.21 |
| P2Y12 (rs2046934) | 0.69 | 0.31 – 1.51 | 0.35 |
| CES1 (rs3815583) | 0.89 | 0.52 – 1.51 | 0.65 |
| CES1 (rs2244613) | 0.75 | 0.45 – 1.27 | 0.28 |

Table 5 Caption: Simple logistic regression association analysis between MACE and genetic and non-genetic factors in clopidogrel-treated patients

### Table 6.

| Variable | Adjusted OR | Adjusted 95% CI | P-value |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Statin use | 0.43 | 0.25 – 0.76 | 0.003 |
| PPI use | 4.77 | 1.47 – 15.54 | 0.009 |
| Diabetes Mellitus | 1.83 | 1.03 – 3.26 | 0.039 |
| CYP2C19 polymorphisms* | 2.23 | 1.15 – 4.33 | 0.018 |

Table 6 Caption: Multiple logistic regression analysis showing genetic and non-genetic factors significantly associated with MACE in clopidogrel-treated participants

## Discussion

DAPT with aspirin plus clopidogrel or another P2Y12 inhibitor is globally recommended to prevent acute coronary events in patients with recent ACS or PCI.[[1](#R1)-[3](#R3)] Despite the widespread use of DAPT with aspirin plus clopidogrel, studies have shown that about 30% of treated patients show resistance to clopidogrel, defined by inadequate antiplatelet response or poor cardiovascular outcomes while being treated with clopidogrel [[6](#R6),[25](#R25)-[27](#R27)]. Similary, ~22-40% of Egyptian patients with ACS show poor antiplatelet response to clopidogrel [[28](#R28),[29](#R29)]. However, data from large studies in Egyptians clarifying the factors contributing toward this poor antiplatelet response are scarce. Thus, this study is unique in that it shows genetic and clinical factors underlying major adverse cardiac events in a relatively large Egyptian cohort of patients treated with DAPT. We were the first to report a significant association between *CYP2C19* genetic polymorphisms and variability in clopidogrel response in Egyptians.^18^ In the current study, in a larger number of patients, we confirmed that *CYP2C19**2 was the only genetic polymorphism, among the SNPs tested, associated with variability in response to clopidogrel in Egyptians.[[24](#R24)] In the current study, in a larger number of patients, we confirmed that *CYP2C19*2* was the only genetic polymorphism, among the SNPs tested, associated with variability in response to clopidogrel in Egyptians. According to the CPIC guidelines and recently published data,[[30](#R30),[31](#R31)] alternative P2Y12 inhibitors (e.g. prasugrel and ticagrelor) may be alternative therapies to clopidogrel in Egyptians carrying *CYP2C19**2 loss-of-function allele.

The comparison of the MAFs of the SNPs tested in this study with those in other continental populations, including African, Asian and European populations, revealed a distinct difference in MAF patterns. These differences in MAFs emphasize our previous observation that the frequency of genetic polymorphisms in Egyptians cannot mirror the frequency from other continental populations, given the known historical ancestral admixture of Egyptians.[[24](#R24),[32](#R32)] Perhaps moving forward towards a more personalized approach for treating patients, genetic research in Egyptians and other Mediterranean populations will be of great importance for enabling novel discoveries in those populations, identifying frequencies of clinically actionable genetic polymorphisms and translating this information into medical genetic knowledge that can help in the implementation of personalized medicine for improving patient care in Egypt and other North African countries.

Interestingly, the results from our multiple logistic regression analysis revealed a significantly higher risk for MACE with concomitant PPI and clopidogrel use. PPIs are often prescribed in clopidogrel-treated patients to reduce the risk of gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding that might be associated with clopidogrel use and concomitant aspirin use. However, PPIs inhibit the CYP2C19 enzyme, which is responsible for converting clopidogrel to its active metabolite, and pharmacodynamic studies have shown that PPIs, especially omeprazole, can reduce clopidogrel’s antiplatelet effect.[[33](#R33)-[36](#R36)] Although the pharmacodynamic interaction between PPIs and clopidogrel is well-documented, observational studies have yielded conflicting results regarding concomitant PPI and clopidogrel use on risk for cardiovascular events in patients with ACS and/or PCI.[[37](#R37)-[41](#R41)] The results from our analysis revealed that clopidogrel-treated patients also taking the PPI omeprazole had significantly higher odds of MACE compared to those not taking PPI. These results are consistent with the results previously published by Ho *et. al.*,[[38](#R38)] and highlight the importance of considering the interaction between PPIs, like omeprazole, and clopidogrel use in Egyptians.

Results from the adjusted regression analysis also highlight the association between diabetes and higher odds of having MACE in clopidogrel-treated patients. Consistent with this finding, several studies have reported an association between diabetes and poor antiplatelet effect of clopidogrel.[[42](#R42),[43](#R43)] Carreras *et al.* have shown that quadrupling the dose of clopidogrel 75 mg/day is needed in diabetic patients to reach on-treatment platelet reactivity similar to non-diabetic individuals.[[23](#R23)] There have been several postulated mechanisms explaining the reduced effect of clopidogrel in diabetic patients.[[44](#R44)-[46](#R46)] Some studies have suggested that hyperglycemia plays an important mechanistic role in platelet dysfunction.[[47](#R47),[48](#R48)] Other studies have hypothesized that the reduced insulin sensitivity in type 2 diabetic patients is the main reason behind the lack of response to clopidogrel as insulin regulates platelet activity through the insulin receptor substrate (IRS-1) on platelets.[[45](#R45),[46](#R46)] Still other potential mechanisms include the potential inhibitory effects of diabetes meelitues on CYP2C19 activity [[49](#R49)], increased exposure to adenosine diphosphate (ADP), increases platelet turnover, and increased cystolic calcium levels in diabetic compared to non-diabetic individuals.[[5](#R5),[50](#R50)]

Atorvastatin has previously been associated with reduced antiplatelet effect to clopidogrel.[[51](#R51),[52](#R52)] However, our results showed that participants who were taking atorvastatin along with clopidogrel had lower odds of having MACE. Our finding aligns with the results of several other studies that have reported a significant reduction in cardiovascular outcomes in patients taking statins with clopidogrel therapy.[[53](#R53),[55](#R55)] The conflicting results[[55](#R55)-[57](#R57)] that have been reported to date may be because of differences in doses or classes of statins and differences in study design and patient selection.

This study has some limitations that should be highlighted. First, the small sample size may have limited our ability to detect an association between the SNPs tested and variability in clopidogrel response. However, we were able to confirm our previous genetic association between *CYP2C19**2 and clopidogrel response in Egyptians. Additionally, we identified several non-genetic factors that together with *CYP2C19* genotype explained 19% of the variability in the studied phenotype. To our knowledge, this is the first study to highlight the significant influence of diabetes, PPI, and statin use on clopidogrel therapy in Egyptians, and the first to confirm the significant role of CYP2C19*2 in Egyptians treated with clopidogrel.

## Conclusion

The results of this study provide evidence of *CYP2C19* gene associations with clopidogrel response in Egyptians with ACS with or without PCI. Additionally, this study highlights the important contribution of diabetes, and concomitant PPI and statin use to the variability in response to DAPT with clopidogrel plus aspirin in Egyptians. These data suggest that consideration of *CYP2C19* genotype in addition to clinical factors may assist in optimizing antiplatelet therapy after ACS in Egyptians.

## Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by a grant from Misr International University, Cairo, Egypt and the University of Florida, Center of Pharmacogenomics and NIH grant U01 HG 00729 and NIH/NCATS U54TR001347.

## Footnotes

## References

1. Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, Brindis RG, Fihn SD, Fleisher LA, et al. 2016 ACC/AHA Guideline Focused Update on Duration of Dual Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients With Coronary Artery Disease: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines: An Update of the 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Percutaneous Coronary Intervention, 2011 ACCF/AHA Guideline for Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery, 2012 ACC/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Patients With Stable Ischemic Heart Disease, 2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the Management of ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction, 2014 AHA/ACC Guideline for the Management of Patients With Non-ST-Elevation Acute Coronary Syndromes, and 2014 ACC/AHA Guideline on Perioperative Cardiovascular Evaluation and Management of Patients Undergoing Noncardiac Surgery. Circulation 2016; 134: e123–155.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000404) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27026020/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=2016%20ACC/AHA%20Guideline%20Focused%20Update%20on%20Duration%20of%20Dual%20Antiplatelet%20Therapy%20in%20Patients%20With%20Coronary%20Artery%20Disease:%20A%20Report%20of%20the%20American%20College%20of%20Cardiology/American%20Heart%20Association%20Task%20Force%20on%20Clinical%20Practice%20Guidelines:%20An%20Update%20of%20the%202011%20ACCF/AHA/SCAI%20Guideline%20for%20Percutaneous%20Coronary%20Intervention,%202011%20ACCF/AHA%20Guideline%20for%20Coronary%20Artery%20Bypass%20Graft%20Surgery,%202012%20ACC/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS%20Guideline%20for%20the%20Diagnosis%20and%20Management%20of%20Patients%20With%20Stable%20Ischemic%20Heart%20Disease,%202013%20ACCF/AHA%20Guideline%20for%20the%20Management%20of%20ST-Elevation%20Myocardial%20Infarction,%202014%20AHA/ACC%20Guideline%20for%20the%20Management%20of%20Patients%20With%20Non-ST-Elevation%20Acute%20Coronary%20Syndromes,%20and%202014%20ACC/AHA%20Guideline%20on%20Perioperative%20Cardiovascular%20Evaluation%20and%20Management%20of%20Patients%20Undergoing%20Noncardiac%20Surgery&author=GN%20Levine&author=ER%20Bates&author=JA%20Bittl&author=RG%20Brindis&author=SD%20Fihn&volume=134&publication_year=2016&pages=e123-155&pmid=27026020&doi=10.1161/CIR.0000000000000404&)

2. Degrauwe S, Pilgrim T, Aminian A, Noble S, Meier P, Iglesias JF. Dual antiplatelet therapy for secondary prevention of coronary artery disease. Open Heart 2017; 4: e000651.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/openhrt-2017-000651) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5652612/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29081979/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Open%20Heart&title=Dual%20antiplatelet%20therapy%20for%20secondary%20prevention%20of%20coronary%20artery%20disease&author=S%20Degrauwe&author=T%20Pilgrim&author=A%20Aminian&author=S%20Noble&author=P%20Meier&volume=4&publication_year=2017&pages=e000651&pmid=29081979&doi=10.1136/openhrt-2017-000651&)

3. Steg PG, James SK, Atar D, Badano LP, Blomstrom-Lundqvist C, Borger MA, et al. ESC Guidelines for the management of acute myocardial infarction in patients presenting with ST-segment elevation. Eur Heart J 2012; 33: 2569–2619.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehs215) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22922416/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20Heart%20J&title=ESC%20Guidelines%20for%20the%20management%20of%20acute%20myocardial%20infarction%20in%20patients%20presenting%20with%20ST-segment%20elevation&author=PG%20Steg&author=SK%20James&author=D%20Atar&author=LP%20Badano&author=C%20Blomstrom-Lundqvist&volume=33&publication_year=2012&pages=2569-2619&pmid=22922416&doi=10.1093/eurheartj/ehs215&)

4. Wurtz M, Grove EL. Interindividual variability in the efficacy of oral antiplatelet drugs: definitions, mechanisms and clinical importance. Curr Pharm Des 2012; 18: 5344–5361.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2174/138161212803251925) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22724409/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Pharm%20Des&title=Interindividual%20variability%20in%20the%20efficacy%20of%20oral%20antiplatelet%20drugs:%20definitions,%20mechanisms%20and%20clinical%20importance&author=M%20Wurtz&author=EL%20Grove&volume=18&publication_year=2012&pages=5344-5361&pmid=22724409&doi=10.2174/138161212803251925&)

5. Angiolillo DJ, Fernandez-Ortiz A, Bernardo E, Alfonso F, Macaya C, Bass TA, et al. Variability in individual responsiveness to clopidogrel: clinical implications, management, and future perspectives. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 49: 1505–1516.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2006.11.044) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17418288/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Am%20Coll%20Cardiol&title=Variability%20in%20individual%20responsiveness%20to%20clopidogrel:%20clinical%20implications,%20management,%20and%20future%20perspectives&author=DJ%20Angiolillo&author=A%20Fernandez-Ortiz&author=E%20Bernardo&author=F%20Alfonso&author=C%20Macaya&volume=49&publication_year=2007&pages=1505-1516&pmid=17418288&doi=10.1016/j.jacc.2006.11.044&)

6. Nguyen TA, Diodati JG, Pharand C. Resistance to clopidogrel: a review of the evidence. J Am Coll Cardiol 2005; 45: 1157–1164.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2005.01.034) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15837243/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Am%20Coll%20Cardiol&title=Resistance%20to%20clopidogrel:%20a%20review%20of%20the%20evidence&author=TA%20Nguyen&author=JG%20Diodati&author=C%20Pharand&volume=45&publication_year=2005&pages=1157-1164&pmid=15837243&doi=10.1016/j.jacc.2005.01.034&)

7. Simon T, Verstuyft C, Mary-Krause M, Quteineh L, Drouet E, Meneveau N, et al. Genetic determinants of response to clopidogrel and cardiovascular events. N Engl J Med 2009; 360: 363–375.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0808227) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19106083/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N%20Engl%20J%20Med&title=Genetic%20determinants%20of%20response%20to%20clopidogrel%20and%20cardiovascular%20events&author=T%20Simon&author=C%20Verstuyft&author=M%20Mary-Krause&author=L%20Quteineh&author=E%20Drouet&volume=360&publication_year=2009&pages=363-375&pmid=19106083&doi=10.1056/NEJMoa0808227&)

8. Karazniewicz-Lada M, Danielak D, Glowka F. Genetic and non-genetic factors affecting the response to clopidogrel therapy. Expert Opin Pharmacother 2012; 13: 663–683.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1517/14656566.2012.666524) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22397459/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Expert%20Opin%20Pharmacother&title=Genetic%20and%20non-genetic%20factors%20affecting%20the%20response%20to%20clopidogrel%20therapy&author=M%20Karazniewicz-Lada&author=D%20Danielak&author=F%20Glowka&volume=13&publication_year=2012&pages=663-683&pmid=22397459&doi=10.1517/14656566.2012.666524&)

9. Mega JL, Simon T, Collet JP, Anderson JL, Antman EM, Bliden K, et al. Reduced-function CYP2C19 genotype and risk of adverse clinical outcomes among patients treated with clopidogrel predominantly for PCI: a meta-analysis. JAMA 2010; 304: 1821–1830.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2010.1543) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3048820/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20978260/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=JAMA&title=Reduced-function%20CYP2C19%20genotype%20and%20risk%20of%20adverse%20clinical%20outcomes%20among%20patients%20treated%20with%20clopidogrel%20predominantly%20for%20PCI:%20a%20meta-analysis&author=JL%20Mega&author=T%20Simon&author=JP%20Collet&author=JL%20Anderson&author=EM%20Antman&volume=304&publication_year=2010&pages=1821-1830&pmid=20978260&doi=10.1001/jama.2010.1543&)

10. Sofi F, Giusti B, Marcucci R, Gori AM, Abbate R, Gensini GF. Cytochrome P450 2C19*2 polymorphism and cardiovascular recurrences in patients taking clopidogrel: a meta-analysis. Pharmacogenomics J 2011; 11: 199–206.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/tpj.2010.21) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20351750/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics%20J&title=Cytochrome%20P450%202C19*2%20polymorphism%20and%20cardiovascular%20recurrences%20in%20patients%20taking%20clopidogrel:%20a%20meta-analysis&author=F%20Sofi&author=B%20Giusti&author=R%20Marcucci&author=AM%20Gori&author=R%20Abbate&volume=11&publication_year=2011&pages=199-206&pmid=20351750&doi=10.1038/tpj.2010.21&)

11. Shahin MH, Johnson JA. Clopidogrel and warfarin pharmacogenetic tests: what is the evidence for use in clinical practice? Curr Opin Cardiol 2013; 28: 305–314.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/HCO.0b013e32835f0bbc) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3731766/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23478884/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Opin%20Cardiol&title=Clopidogrel%20and%20warfarin%20pharmacogenetic%20tests:%20what%20is%20the%20evidence%20for%20use%20in%20clinical%20practice?&author=MH%20Shahin&author=JA%20Johnson&volume=28&publication_year=2013&pages=305-314&pmid=23478884&doi=10.1097/HCO.0b013e32835f0bbc&)

12. Shuldiner AR, O'Connell JR, Bliden KP, Gandhi A, Ryan K, Horenstein RB, et al. Association of cytochrome P450 2C19 genotype with the antiplatelet effect and clinical efficacy of clopidogrel therapy. JAMA 2009; 302: 849–857.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2009.1232) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3641569/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19706858/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=JAMA&title=Association%20of%20cytochrome%20P450%202C19%20genotype%20with%20the%20antiplatelet%20effect%20and%20clinical%20efficacy%20of%20clopidogrel%20therapy&author=AR%20Shuldiner&author=JR%20O'Connell&author=KP%20Bliden&author=A%20Gandhi&author=K%20Ryan&volume=302&publication_year=2009&pages=849-857&pmid=19706858&doi=10.1001/jama.2009.1232&)

13. Simon T, Bhatt DL, Bergougnan L, Farenc C, Pearson K, Perrin L, et al. Genetic polymorphisms and the impact of a higher clopidogrel dose regimen on active metabolite exposure and antiplatelet response in healthy subjects. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2011; 90: 287–295.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/clpt.2011.127) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21716274/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Pharmacol%20Ther&title=Genetic%20polymorphisms%20and%20the%20impact%20of%20a%20higher%20clopidogrel%20dose%20regimen%20on%20active%20metabolite%20exposure%20and%20antiplatelet%20response%20in%20healthy%20subjects&author=T%20Simon&author=DL%20Bhatt&author=L%20Bergougnan&author=C%20Farenc&author=K%20Pearson&volume=90&publication_year=2011&pages=287-295&pmid=21716274&doi=10.1038/clpt.2011.127&)

14. Ferguson RJ, De Morais SM, Benhamou S, Bouchardy C, Blaisdell J, Ibeanu G, et al. A new genetic defect in human CYP2C19: mutation of the initiation codon is responsible for poor metabolism of S-mephenytoin. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1998; 284:356–361.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9435198/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Pharmacol%20Exp%20Ther&title=A%20new%20genetic%20defect%20in%20human%20CYP2C19:%20mutation%20of%20the%20initiation%20codon%20is%20responsible%20for%20poor%20metabolism%20of%20S-mephenytoin&author=RJ%20Ferguson&author=SM%20De%20Morais&author=S%20Benhamou&author=C%20Bouchardy&author=J%20Blaisdell&volume=284&publication_year=1998&pages=356-361&pmid=9435198&)

15. Garcia-Barcelo M, Chow LY, Kum Chiu HF,Wing YK, Shing Lee DT, Lam KL, et al. Frequencies of defective CYP2C19 alleles in a Hong Kong Chinese population: detection of the rare allele CYP2C19*4. Clin Chem 1999; 45:2273–2274.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10585366/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Chem&title=Frequencies%20of%20defective%20CYP2C19%20alleles%20in%20a%20Hong%20Kong%20Chinese%20population:%20detection%20of%20the%20rare%20allele%20CYP2C19*4&author=M%20Garcia-Barcelo&author=LY%20Chow&author=HF%20Kum%20Chiu&author=YK%20Wing&author=DT%20Shing%20Lee&volume=45&publication_year=1999&pages=2273-2274&pmid=10585366&)

16. Scott SA, Martis S, Peter I, Kasai Y, Kornreich R, Desnick RJ. Identification of CYP2C19*4B: pharmacogenetic implications for drug metabolism including clopidogrel responsiveness. Pharmacogenomics J 2012; 12:297–305.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/tpj.2011.5) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3310336/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21358751/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics%20J&title=Identification%20of%20CYP2C19*4B:%20pharmacogenetic%20implications%20for%20drug%20metabolism%20including%20clopidogrel%20responsiveness&author=SA%20Scott&author=S%20Martis&author=I%20Peter&author=Y%20Kasai&author=R%20Kornreich&volume=12&publication_year=2012&pages=297-305&pmid=21358751&doi=10.1038/tpj.2011.5&)

17. Atzmon G, Hao L, Pe’er I, Velez C, Pearlman A, Palamara PF, et al. Abraham’s children in the genome era: major Jewish diaspora populations comprise distinct genetic clusters with shared Middle Eastern Ancestry. Am J Hum Genet 2010; 86:850–859.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.04.015) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3032072/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20560205/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Hum%20Genet&title=Abraham%E2%80%99s%20children%20in%20the%20genome%20era:%20major%20Jewish%20diaspora%20populations%20comprise%20distinct%20genetic%20clusters%20with%20shared%20Middle%20Eastern%20Ancestry&author=G%20Atzmon&author=L%20Hao&author=I%20Pe%E2%80%99er&author=C%20Velez&author=A%20Pearlman&volume=86&publication_year=2010&pages=850-859&pmid=20560205&doi=10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.04.015&)

18. Kopelman NM, Stone L, Wang C, Gefel D, Feldman MW, Hillel J, et al. Genomic microsatellites identify shared Jewish ancestry intermediate between Middle Eastern and European populations. BMC Genet 2009; 10:80.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2156-10-80) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2797531/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19995433/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Genet&title=Genomic%20microsatellites%20identify%20shared%20Jewish%20ancestry%20intermediate%20between%20Middle%20Eastern%20and%20European%20populations&author=NM%20Kopelman&author=L%20Stone&author=C%20Wang&author=D%20Gefel&author=MW%20Feldman&volume=10&publication_year=2009&pages=80&pmid=19995433&doi=10.1186/1471-2156-10-80&)

19. Shahin MH, Cavallari LH, Perera MA, Khalifa SI, Misher A, Langaee T, et al. VKORC1 Asp36Tyr geographic distribution and its impact on warfarin dose requirements in Egyptians. Thromb Haemost 2013; 109:1045–1050.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1160/TH12-10-0789) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3712827/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23571513/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Thromb%20Haemost&title=VKORC1%20Asp36Tyr%20geographic%20distribution%20and%20its%20impact%20on%20warfarin%20dose%20requirements%20in%20Egyptians&author=MH%20Shahin&author=LH%20Cavallari&author=MA%20Perera&author=SI%20Khalifa&author=A%20Misher&volume=109&publication_year=2013&pages=1045-1050&pmid=23571513&doi=10.1160/TH12-10-0789&)

20. Lewis JP, Ryan K, O'Connell JR, Horenstein RB, Damcott CM, Gibson Q, et al. Genetic variation in PEAR1 is associated with platelet aggregation and cardiovascular outcomes. Circ Cardiovasc Genet 2013; 6: 184–192.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.111.964627) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3715320/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23392654/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circ%20Cardiovasc%20Genet&title=Genetic%20variation%20in%20PEAR1%20is%20associated%20with%20platelet%20aggregation%20and%20cardiovascular%20outcomes&author=JP%20Lewis&author=K%20Ryan&author=JR%20O'Connell&author=RB%20Horenstein&author=CM%20Damcott&volume=6&publication_year=2013&pages=184-192&pmid=23392654&doi=10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.111.964627&)

21. Yao Y, Tang XF, Zhang JH, He C, Ma YL, Xu JJ, et al. Association of PEAR1 genetic variants with platelet reactivity in response to dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel in the Chinese patient population after percutaneous coronary intervention. Thromb Res 2016; 141: 28–34.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.thromres.2016.02.031) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26962983/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Thromb%20Res&title=Association%20of%20PEAR1%20genetic%20variants%20with%20platelet%20reactivity%20in%20response%20to%20dual%20antiplatelet%20therapy%20with%20aspirin%20and%20clopidogrel%20in%20the%20Chinese%20patient%20population%20after%20percutaneous%20coronary%20intervention&author=Y%20Yao&author=XF%20Tang&author=JH%20Zhang&author=C%20He&author=YL%20Ma&volume=141&publication_year=2016&pages=28-34&pmid=26962983&doi=10.1016/j.thromres.2016.02.031&)

22. Notarangelo MF, Bontardelli F, Merlini PA. Genetic and nongenetic factors influencing the response to clopidogrel. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown) 2013; 14 Suppl 1: S1–7.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2459/JCM.0b013e328364bb04) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24378836/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Cardiovasc%20Med%20(Hagerstown)&title=Genetic%20and%20nongenetic%20factors%20influencing%20the%20response%20to%20clopidogrel&author=MF%20Notarangelo&author=F%20Bontardelli&author=PA%20Merlini&volume=14&issue=Suppl%201&publication_year=2013&pages=S1-7&pmid=24378836&doi=10.2459/JCM.0b013e328364bb04&)

23. Carreras ET, Hochholzer W, Frelinger AL 3rd, Nordio F, O'Donoghue ML, Wiviott SD, et al. Diabetes mellitus, CYP2C19 genotype, and response to escalating doses of clopidogrel. Insights from the ELEVATE-TIMI 56 Trial. Thromb Haemost 2016; 116: 69–77.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1160/TH15-12-0981) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27009617/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Thromb%20Haemost&title=Diabetes%20mellitus,%20CYP2C19%20genotype,%20and%20response%20to%20escalating%20doses%20of%20clopidogrel.%20Insights%20from%20the%20ELEVATE-TIMI%2056%20Trial&author=ET%20Carreras&author=W%20Hochholzer&author=AL%20Frelinger&author=F%20Nordio&author=ML%20O'Donoghue&volume=116&publication_year=2016&pages=69-77&pmid=27009617&doi=10.1160/TH15-12-0981&)

24. Khalil BM, Shahin MH, Solayman MH, Langaee T, Schaalan MF, Gong Y, et al. Genetic and Nongenetic Factors Affecting Clopidogrel Response in the Egyptian Population. Clin Transl Sci 2016; 9: 23–28.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/cts.12383) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4760893/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26757134/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Transl%20Sci&title=Genetic%20and%20Nongenetic%20Factors%20Affecting%20Clopidogrel%20Response%20in%20the%20Egyptian%20Population&author=BM%20Khalil&author=MH%20Shahin&author=MH%20Solayman&author=T%20Langaee&author=MF%20Schaalan&volume=9&publication_year=2016&pages=23-28&pmid=26757134&doi=10.1111/cts.12383&)

25. Feher G, Feher A, Pusch G, Koltai K, Tibold A, Gasztonyi B, et al. Clinical importance of aspirin and clopidogrel resistance. World J Cardiol 2010; 2: 171–186.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.4330/wjc.v2.i7.171) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2998916/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21160749/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=World%20J%20Cardiol&title=Clinical%20importance%20of%20aspirin%20and%20clopidogrel%20resistance&author=G%20Feher&author=A%20Feher&author=G%20Pusch&author=K%20Koltai&author=A%20Tibold&volume=2&publication_year=2010&pages=171-186&pmid=21160749&doi=10.4330/wjc.v2.i7.171&)

26. Gurbel PA, Bliden KP, Hiatt BL, O'Connor CM. Clopidogrel for coronary stenting: response variability, drug resistance, and the effect of pretreatment platelet reactivity. Circulation 2003; 107: 2908–2913.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.0000072771.11429.83) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12796140/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Clopidogrel%20for%20coronary%20stenting:%20response%20variability,%20drug%20resistance,%20and%20the%20effect%20of%20pretreatment%20platelet%20reactivity&author=PA%20Gurbel&author=KP%20Bliden&author=BL%20Hiatt&author=CM%20O'Connor&volume=107&publication_year=2003&pages=2908-2913&pmid=12796140&doi=10.1161/01.CIR.0000072771.11429.83&)

27. Muller I, Besta F, Schulz C, Massberg S, Schonig A, Gawaz M. Prevalence of clopidogrel non-responders among patients with stable angina pectoris scheduled for elective coronary stent placement. Thromb Haemost 2003; 89: 783–787.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12719773/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Thromb%20Haemost&title=Prevalence%20of%20clopidogrel%20non-responders%20among%20patients%20with%20stable%20angina%20pectoris%20scheduled%20for%20elective%20coronary%20stent%20placement&author=I%20Muller&author=F%20Besta&author=C%20Schulz&author=S%20Massberg&author=A%20Schonig&volume=89&publication_year=2003&pages=783-787&pmid=12719773&)

28. Zoheir N, Abd Elhamid S, Abulata N, El Sobky M, Khafagy D, Mostafa A. P2Y12 receptor gene polymorphism and antiplatelet effect of clopidogrel in patients with coronary artery disease after coronary stenting. Blood CoagulFibrinolysis 2013; 24:525–531.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/MBC.0b013e32835e98bf) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23751603/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Blood%20CoagulFibrinolysis&title=P2Y12%20receptor%20gene%20polymorphism%20and%20antiplatelet%20effect%20of%20clopidogrel%20in%20patients%20with%20coronary%20artery%20disease%20after%20coronary%20stenting&author=N%20Zoheir&author=S%20Abd%20Elhamid&author=N%20Abulata&author=M%20El%20Sobky&author=D%20Khafagy&volume=24&publication_year=2013&pages=525-531&pmid=23751603&doi=10.1097/MBC.0b013e32835e98bf&)

29. O I, M O, A AS, Hh CH, W SF, Rahman M. Evaluation of aspirin and clopidogrel resistance in patients with acute coronary syndrome by using adenosine diposphate test and aspirin test. Pak J Med Sci 2013; 29:97–102.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.12669/pjms.291.2820) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3809214/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24353516/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pak%20J%20Med%20Sci&title=Evaluation%20of%20aspirin%20and%20clopidogrel%20resistance%20in%20patients%20with%20acute%20coronary%20syndrome%20by%20using%20adenosine%20diposphate%20test%20and%20aspirin%20test&author=I%20O&author=O%20M&author=AS%20A&author=CH%20Hh&author=SF%20W&volume=29&publication_year=2013&pages=97-102&pmid=24353516&doi=10.12669/pjms.291.2820&)

30. Scott SA, Sangkuhl K, Stein CM, Hulot JS, Mega JL, Roden DM, et al. Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium guidelines for CYP2C19 genotype and clopidogrel therapy: 2013 update. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2013; 94: 317–323.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/clpt.2013.105) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3748366/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23698643/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Pharmacol%20Ther&title=Clinical%20Pharmacogenetics%20Implementation%20Consortium%20guidelines%20for%20CYP2C19%20genotype%20and%20clopidogrel%20therapy:%202013%20update&author=SA%20Scott&author=K%20Sangkuhl&author=CM%20Stein&author=JS%20Hulot&author=JL%20Mega&volume=94&publication_year=2013&pages=317-323&pmid=23698643&doi=10.1038/clpt.2013.105&)

31. Cavallari LH, Lee CR, Beitelshees AL, Cooper-DeHoff RM, Duarte JD, Voora D, et al. Multisite Investigation of Outcomes With Implementation of CYP2C19 Genotype-Guided Antiplatelet Therapy After Percutaneous Coronary Intervention. JACC Cardiovasc Interv 2017.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcin.2017.07.022) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5775044/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29102571/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=JACC%20Cardiovasc%20Interv&title=Multisite%20Investigation%20of%20Outcomes%20With%20Implementation%20of%20CYP2C19%20Genotype-Guided%20Antiplatelet%20Therapy%20After%20Percutaneous%20Coronary%20Intervention&author=LH%20Cavallari&author=CR%20Lee&author=AL%20Beitelshees&author=RM%20Cooper-DeHoff&author=JD%20Duarte&publication_year=2017&pmid=29102571&doi=10.1016/j.jcin.2017.07.022&)

32. Shahin MH, Khalifa SI, Gong Y, Hammad LN, Sallam MT, El Shafey M, et al. Genetic and nongenetic factors associated with warfarin dose requirements in Egyptian patients. Pharmacogenet Genomics 2011; 21: 130–135.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0b013e3283436b86) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3038469/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21228733/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenet%20Genomics&title=Genetic%20and%20nongenetic%20factors%20associated%20with%20warfarin%20dose%20requirements%20in%20Egyptian%20patients&author=MH%20Shahin&author=SI%20Khalifa&author=Y%20Gong&author=LN%20Hammad&author=MT%20Sallam&volume=21&publication_year=2011&pages=130-135&pmid=21228733&doi=10.1097/FPC.0b013e3283436b86&)

33. Gerson LB. Proton pump inhibitors and potential interactions with clopidogrel: an update. Curr Gastroenterol Rep 2013; 15: 329.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11894-013-0329-1) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23695547/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Gastroenterol%20Rep&title=Proton%20pump%20inhibitors%20and%20potential%20interactions%20with%20clopidogrel:%20an%20update&author=LB%20Gerson&volume=15&publication_year=2013&pages=329&pmid=23695547&doi=10.1007/s11894-013-0329-1&)

34. Sibbing D, Morath T, Stegherr J, Braun S, Vogt W, Hadamitzky M, et al. Impact of proton pump inhibitors on the antiplatelet effects of clopidogrel. Thromb Haemost 2009; 101: 714–719.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19350116/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Thromb%20Haemost&title=Impact%20of%20proton%20pump%20inhibitors%20on%20the%20antiplatelet%20effects%20of%20clopidogrel&author=D%20Sibbing&author=T%20Morath&author=J%20Stegherr&author=S%20Braun&author=W%20Vogt&volume=101&publication_year=2009&pages=714-719&pmid=19350116&)

35. Gilard M, Arnaud B, Cornily JC, Le Gal G, Lacut K, Le Calvez G, et al. Influence of omeprazole on the antiplatelet action of clopidogrel associated with aspirin: the randomized, double-blind OCLA (Omeprazole CLopidogrel Aspirin) study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008; 51: 256–260.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2007.06.064) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18206732/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Am%20Coll%20Cardiol&title=Influence%20of%20omeprazole%20on%20the%20antiplatelet%20action%20of%20clopidogrel%20associated%20with%20aspirin:%20the%20randomized,%20double-blind%20OCLA%20(Omeprazole%20CLopidogrel%20Aspirin)%20study&author=M%20Gilard&author=B%20Arnaud&author=JC%20Cornily&author=G%20Le%20Gal&author=K%20Lacut&volume=51&publication_year=2008&pages=256-260&pmid=18206732&doi=10.1016/j.jacc.2007.06.064&)

36. Angiolillo DJ, Gibson CM, Cheng S, Ollier C, Nicolas O, Bergougnan L, et al. Differential effects of omeprazole and pantoprazole on the pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of clopidogrel in healthy subjects: randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover comparison studies. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2011; 89: 65–74.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/clpt.2010.219) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20844485/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Pharmacol%20Ther&title=Differential%20effects%20of%20omeprazole%20and%20pantoprazole%20on%20the%20pharmacodynamics%20and%20pharmacokinetics%20of%20clopidogrel%20in%20healthy%20subjects:%20randomized,%20placebo-controlled,%20crossover%20comparison%20studies&author=DJ%20Angiolillo&author=CM%20Gibson&author=S%20Cheng&author=C%20Ollier&author=O%20Nicolas&volume=89&publication_year=2011&pages=65-74&pmid=20844485&doi=10.1038/clpt.2010.219&)

37. Ray WA, Murray KT, Griffin MR, Chung CP, Smalley WE, Hall K, et al. Outcomes with concurrent use of clopidogrel and proton-pump inhibitors: a cohort study. Ann Intern Med 2010; 152: 337–345.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1059/0003-4819-152-6-201003160-00003) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3176584/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20231564/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann%20Intern%20Med&title=Outcomes%20with%20concurrent%20use%20of%20clopidogrel%20and%20proton-pump%20inhibitors:%20a%20cohort%20study&author=WA%20Ray&author=KT%20Murray&author=MR%20Griffin&author=CP%20Chung&author=WE%20Smalley&volume=152&publication_year=2010&pages=337-345&pmid=20231564&doi=10.1059/0003-4819-152-6-201003160-00003&)

38. Ho PM, Maddox TM, Wang L, Fihn SD, Jesse RL, Peterson ED, et al. Risk of adverse outcomes associated with concomitant use of clopidogrel and proton pump inhibitors following acute coronary syndrome. JAMA 2009; 301: 937–944.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2009.261) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19258584/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=JAMA&title=Risk%20of%20adverse%20outcomes%20associated%20with%20concomitant%20use%20of%20clopidogrel%20and%20proton%20pump%20inhibitors%20following%20acute%20coronary%20syndrome&author=PM%20Ho&author=TM%20Maddox&author=L%20Wang&author=SD%20Fihn&author=RL%20Jesse&volume=301&publication_year=2009&pages=937-944&pmid=19258584&doi=10.1001/jama.2009.261&)

39. Charlot M, Ahlehoff O, Norgaard ML, Jorgensen CH, Sorensen R, Abildstrom SZ, et al. Proton-pump inhibitors are associated with increased cardiovascular risk independent of clopidogrel use: a nationwide cohort study. Ann Intern Med 2010; 153: 378–386.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-153-6-201009210-00005) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20855802/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann%20Intern%20Med&title=Proton-pump%20inhibitors%20are%20associated%20with%20increased%20cardiovascular%20risk%20independent%20of%20clopidogrel%20use:%20a%20nationwide%20cohort%20study&author=M%20Charlot&author=O%20Ahlehoff&author=ML%20Norgaard&author=CH%20Jorgensen&author=R%20Sorensen&volume=153&publication_year=2010&pages=378-386&pmid=20855802&doi=10.7326/0003-4819-153-6-201009210-00005&)

40. Stockl KM, Le L, Zakharyan A, Harada AS, Solow BK, Addiego JE, et al. Risk of rehospitalization for patients using clopidogrel with a proton pump inhibitor. Arch Intern Med 2010; 170: 704–710.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/archinternmed.2010.34) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20421557/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Arch%20Intern%20Med&title=Risk%20of%20rehospitalization%20for%20patients%20using%20clopidogrel%20with%20a%20proton%20pump%20inhibitor&author=KM%20Stockl&author=L%20Le&author=A%20Zakharyan&author=AS%20Harada&author=BK%20Solow&volume=170&publication_year=2010&pages=704-710&pmid=20421557&doi=10.1001/archinternmed.2010.34&)

41. Rassen JA, Choudhry NK, Avorn J, Schneeweiss S. Cardiovascular outcomes and mortality in patients using clopidogrel with proton pump inhibitors after percutaneous coronary intervention or acute coronary syndrome. Circulation 2009; 120: 2322–2329.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.873497) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2818789/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19933932/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Cardiovascular%20outcomes%20and%20mortality%20in%20patients%20using%20clopidogrel%20with%20proton%20pump%20inhibitors%20after%20percutaneous%20coronary%20intervention%20or%20acute%20coronary%20syndrome&author=JA%20Rassen&author=NK%20Choudhry&author=J%20Avorn&author=S%20Schneeweiss&volume=120&publication_year=2009&pages=2322-2329&pmid=19933932&doi=10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.873497&)

42. Angiolillo DJ, Fernandez-Ortiz A, Bernardo E, Ramirez C, Sabate M, Jimenez-Quevedo P, et al. Platelet function profiles in patients with type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease on combined aspirin and clopidogrel treatment. Diabetes 2005; 54: 2430–2435.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/diabetes.54.8.2430) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16046311/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes&title=Platelet%20function%20profiles%20in%20patients%20with%20type%202%20diabetes%20and%20coronary%20artery%20disease%20on%20combined%20aspirin%20and%20clopidogrel%20treatment&author=DJ%20Angiolillo&author=A%20Fernandez-Ortiz&author=E%20Bernardo&author=C%20Ramirez&author=M%20Sabate&volume=54&publication_year=2005&pages=2430-2435&pmid=16046311&doi=10.2337/diabetes.54.8.2430&)

43. Serebruany V, Pokov I, Kuliczkowski W, Chesebro J, Badimon J. Baseline platelet activity and response after clopidogrel in 257 diabetics among 822 patients with coronary artery disease. Thromb Haemost 2008; 100: 76–82.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1160/TH08-03-0136) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18612541/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Thromb%20Haemost&title=Baseline%20platelet%20activity%20and%20response%20after%20clopidogrel%20in%20257%20diabetics%20among%20822%20patients%20with%20coronary%20artery%20disease&author=V%20Serebruany&author=I%20Pokov&author=W%20Kuliczkowski&author=J%20Chesebro&author=J%20Badimon&volume=100&publication_year=2008&pages=76-82&pmid=18612541&doi=10.1160/TH08-03-0136&)

44. Angiolillo DJ, Jakubowski JA, Ferreiro JL, Tello-Montoliu A, Rollini F, Franchi F, et al. Impaired responsiveness to the platelet P2Y12 receptor antagonist clopidogrel in patients with type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014; 64: 1005–1014.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2014.06.1170) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25190236/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Am%20Coll%20Cardiol&title=Impaired%20responsiveness%20to%20the%20platelet%20P2Y12%20receptor%20antagonist%20clopidogrel%20in%20patients%20with%20type%202%20diabetes%20and%20coronary%20artery%20disease&author=DJ%20Angiolillo&author=JA%20Jakubowski&author=JL%20Ferreiro&author=A%20Tello-Montoliu&author=F%20Rollini&volume=64&publication_year=2014&pages=1005-1014&pmid=25190236&doi=10.1016/j.jacc.2014.06.1170&)

45. Angiolillo DJ, Bernardo E, Zanoni M, Vivas D, Capranzano P, Malerba G, et al. Impact of insulin receptor substrate-1 genotypes on platelet reactivity and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 2011; 58: 30–39.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2011.02.040) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21700086/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Am%20Coll%20Cardiol&title=Impact%20of%20insulin%20receptor%20substrate-1%20genotypes%20on%20platelet%20reactivity%20and%20cardiovascular%20outcomes%20in%20patients%20with%20type%202%20diabetes%20mellitus%20and%20coronary%20artery%20disease&author=DJ%20Angiolillo&author=E%20Bernardo&author=M%20Zanoni&author=D%20Vivas&author=P%20Capranzano&volume=58&publication_year=2011&pages=30-39&pmid=21700086&doi=10.1016/j.jacc.2011.02.040&)

46. Zhang D, Zhang X, Liu D, Liu T, Cai W, Yan C, et al. Association between insulin receptor substrate-1 polymorphisms and high platelet reactivity with clopidogrel therapy in coronary artery disease patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cardiovasc Diabetol 2016; 15: 50.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12933-016-0362-0) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4804508/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27005817/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cardiovasc%20Diabetol&title=Association%20between%20insulin%20receptor%20substrate-1%20polymorphisms%20and%20high%20platelet%20reactivity%20with%20clopidogrel%20therapy%20in%20coronary%20artery%20disease%20patients%20with%20type%202%20diabetes%20mellitus&author=D%20Zhang&author=X%20Zhang&author=D%20Liu&author=T%20Liu&author=W%20Cai&volume=15&publication_year=2016&pages=50&pmid=27005817&doi=10.1186/s12933-016-0362-0&)

47. Evangelista V, de Berardis G, Totani L, Avanzini F, Giorda CB, Brero L, et al. Persistent platelet activation in patients with type 2 diabetes treated with low doses of aspirin. J Thromb Haemost 2007; 5: 2197–2203.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1538-7836.2007.02728.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17697141/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Thromb%20Haemost&title=Persistent%20platelet%20activation%20in%20patients%20with%20type%202%20diabetes%20treated%20with%20low%20doses%20of%20aspirin&author=V%20Evangelista&author=G%20de%20Berardis&author=L%20Totani&author=F%20Avanzini&author=CB%20Giorda&volume=5&publication_year=2007&pages=2197-2203&pmid=17697141&doi=10.1111/j.1538-7836.2007.02728.x&)

48. Ferroni P, Basili S, Falco A, Davi G. Platelet activation in type 2 diabetes mellitus. J Thromb Haemost 2004; 2: 1282–1291.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1538-7836.2004.00836.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15304032/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Thromb%20Haemost&title=Platelet%20activation%20in%20type%202%20diabetes%20mellitus&author=P%20Ferroni&author=S%20Basili&author=A%20Falco&author=G%20Davi&volume=2&publication_year=2004&pages=1282-1291&pmid=15304032&doi=10.1111/j.1538-7836.2004.00836.x&)

49. Storm N, Jansen Van Vuren P, Markotter W, Paweska JT. Antibody responses to marburg virus in egyptian rousette bats and their role in protection against infection. Viruses 2018; 10:2.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/v10020073) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5850380/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29439384/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Viruses&title=Antibody%20responses%20to%20marburg%20virus%20in%20egyptian%20rousette%20bats%20and%20their%20role%20in%20protection%20against%20infection&author=N%20Storm&author=P%20Jansen%20Van%20Vuren&author=W%20Markotter&author=JT%20Paweska&volume=10&publication_year=2018&pages=2&pmid=29439384&doi=10.3390/v10020073&)

50. Angiolillo DJ. Antiplatelet therapy in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes 2007; 14: 124–131.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/MED.0b013e32807f2ad9) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17940430/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Opin%20Endocrinol%20Diabetes%20Obes&title=Antiplatelet%20therapy%20in%20type%202%20diabetes%20mellitus&author=DJ%20Angiolillo&volume=14&publication_year=2007&pages=124-131&pmid=17940430&doi=10.1097/MED.0b013e32807f2ad9&)

51. Lau WC, Waskell LA, Watkins PB, Neer CJ, Horowitz K, Hopp AS, et al. Atorvastatin reduces the ability of clopidogrel to inhibit platelet aggregation: a new drug-drug interaction. Circulation 2003; 107: 32–37.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.0000047060.60595.cc) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12515739/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Circulation&title=Atorvastatin%20reduces%20the%20ability%20of%20clopidogrel%20to%20inhibit%20platelet%20aggregation:%20a%20new%20drug-drug%20interaction&author=WC%20Lau&author=LA%20Waskell&author=PB%20Watkins&author=CJ%20Neer&author=K%20Horowitz&volume=107&publication_year=2003&pages=32-37&pmid=12515739&doi=10.1161/01.cir.0000047060.60595.cc&)

52. Neubauer H, Gunesdogan B, Hanefeld C, Spiecker M, Mugge A. Lipophilic statins interfere with the inhibitory effects of clopidogrel on platelet function--a flow cytometry study. Eur Heart J 2003; 24: 1744–1749.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0195-668x(03)00442-1) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14522569/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20Heart%20J&title=Lipophilic%20statins%20interfere%20with%20the%20inhibitory%20effects%20of%20clopidogrel%20on%20platelet%20function--a%20flow%20cytometry%20study&author=H%20Neubauer&author=B%20Gunesdogan&author=C%20Hanefeld&author=M%20Spiecker&author=A%20Mugge&volume=24&publication_year=2003&pages=1744-1749&pmid=14522569&doi=10.1016/s0195-668x(03)00442-1&)

53. Wienbergen H, Gitt AK, Schiele R, Juenger C, Heer T, Meisenzahl C, et al. Comparison of clinical benefits of clopidogrel therapy in patients with acute coronary syndromes taking atorvastatin versus other statin therapies. Am J Cardiol 2003; 92: 285–288.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0002-9149(03)00626-x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12888133/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Cardiol&title=Comparison%20of%20clinical%20benefits%20of%20clopidogrel%20therapy%20in%20patients%20with%20acute%20coronary%20syndromes%20taking%20atorvastatin%20versus%20other%20statin%20therapies&author=H%20Wienbergen&author=AK%20Gitt&author=R%20Schiele&author=C%20Juenger&author=T%20Heer&volume=92&publication_year=2003&pages=285-288&pmid=12888133&doi=10.1016/s0002-9149(03)00626-x&)

54. Ojeifo O, Wiviott SD, Antman EM, Murphy SA, Udell JA, Bates ER, et al. Concomitant administration of clopidogrel with statins or calcium-channel blockers: insights from the TRITON-TIMI 38 (trial to assess improvement in therapeutic outcomes by optimizing platelet inhibition with prasugrel-thrombolysis in myocardial infarction 38). JACC Cardiovasc Interv 2013; 6: 1275–1281.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcin.2013.06.014) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24239201/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=JACC%20Cardiovasc%20Interv&title=Concomitant%20administration%20of%20clopidogrel%20with%20statins%20or%20calcium-channel%20blockers:%20insights%20from%20the%20TRITON-TIMI%2038%20(trial%20to%20assess%20improvement%20in%20therapeutic%20outcomes%20by%20optimizing%20platelet%20inhibition%20with%20prasugrel-thrombolysis%20in%20myocardial%20infarction%2038)&author=O%20Ojeifo&author=SD%20Wiviott&author=EM%20Antman&author=SA%20Murphy&author=JA%20Udell&volume=6&publication_year=2013&pages=1275-1281&pmid=24239201&doi=10.1016/j.jcin.2013.06.014&)

55. Saw J, Brennan DM, Steinhubl SR, Bhatt DL, Mak KH, Fox K, et al. Lack of evidence of a clopidogrel-statin interaction in the CHARISMA trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 50: 291–295.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2007.01.097) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17659194/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Am%20Coll%20Cardiol&title=Lack%20of%20evidence%20of%20a%20clopidogrel-statin%20interaction%20in%20the%20CHARISMA%20trial&author=J%20Saw&author=DM%20Brennan&author=SR%20Steinhubl&author=DL%20Bhatt&author=KH%20Mak&volume=50&publication_year=2007&pages=291-295&pmid=17659194&doi=10.1016/j.jacc.2007.01.097&)

56. Bhindi R, Ormerod O, Newton J, Banning AP, Testa L. Interaction between statins and clopidogrel: is there anything clinically relevant? QJM 2008; 101:915–925.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/qjmed/hcn089) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18676683/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=QJM&title=Interaction%20between%20statins%20and%20clopidogrel:%20is%20there%20anything%20clinically%20relevant?&author=R%20Bhindi&author=O%20Ormerod&author=J%20Newton&author=AP%20Banning&author=L%20Testa&volume=101&publication_year=2008&pages=915-925&pmid=18676683&doi=10.1093/qjmed/hcn089&)

57. Siepmann T, Heinke D, Kepplinger J, Barlinn K, Gehrisch S, Grahlert X, et al. Interaction of clopidogrel and statins in secondary prevention after cerebral ischaemia: a randomized, double-blind, double-dummy crossover study. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2014; 78:1058–1066.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/bcp.12416) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4243880/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24803100/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Br%20J%20Clin%20Pharmacol&title=Interaction%20of%20clopidogrel%20and%20statins%20in%20secondary%20prevention%20after%20cerebral%20ischaemia:%20a%20randomized,%20double-blind,%20double-dummy%20crossover%20study&author=T%20Siepmann&author=D%20Heinke&author=J%20Kepplinger&author=K%20Barlinn&author=S%20Gehrisch&volume=78&publication_year=2014&pages=1058-1066&pmid=24803100&doi=10.1111/bcp.12416&)
