# Pharmacogenetics of pain management in Zimbabwean patients with sickle cell disease

## Metadata
**Authors:** Nyasha Lorraine Mapira, Roslyn Stella Thelingwani, Zedias Chikwambi, Patience Kuona, Collen Masimirembwa
**Journal:** Pharmacogenomics
**Date:** 2023 May 30
**DOI:** [10.2217/pgs-2023-0045](https://doi.org/10.2217/pgs-2023-0045)
**PMID:** 37248824
**PMCID:** PMC10318569
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10318569/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10318569/pdf/pgs-24-359.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10318569/pdf/pgs-24-359.pdf)

## Abstract

**Background:** 
Pain is a common cause of hospitalization in sickle cell disease (SCD) patients. Failure to effectively control pain remains a challenge in patient care.

**Materials & methods:** 
The authors conducted a cross-sectional study to determine the effect of CYP2D6 and UGT2B7 polymorphisms on pain management in 106 Zimbabwean SCD patients. Participant information was collected on a questionnaire. Genotyping was conducted using the GenoPharm® pharmacogenomics open array panel containing CYP2D6 and UGT genetic variants implicated in opioid response.

**Results:** 
The reduced function alleles CYP2D6*17 and *29 had high frequencies of 15.9% and 12.9%, respectively. UGT2B7 rs73823859 showed a statistically significant correlation with pain levels (p = 0.0454).

**Conclusion:** 
This study demonstrated the role of UGT2B7 polymorphism in SCD patient pain management.

Keywords: codeine, CYP2D6, genetic variation, morphine, opioids, pharmacogenomics, tramadol, UGT2B7

### Background:

Pain is a common cause of hospitalization in sickle cell disease (SCD) patients. Failure to effectively control pain remains a challenge in patient care.

### Materials & methods:

The authors conducted a cross-sectional study to determine the effect of *CYP2D6* and *UGT2B7* polymorphisms on pain management in 106 Zimbabwean SCD patients. Participant information was collected on a questionnaire. Genotyping was conducted using the GenoPharm^®^ pharmacogenomics open array panel containing *CYP2D6* and *UGT* genetic variants implicated in opioid response.

### Results:

The reduced function alleles *CYP2D6*17* and **29* had high frequencies of 15.9% and 12.9%, respectively. *UGT2B7* rs73823859 showed a statistically significant correlation with pain levels (p = 0.0454).

### Conclusion:

This study demonstrated the role of *UGT2B7* polymorphism in SCD patient pain management.

## Materials & methods

### Study design & patient population

The authors conducted a cross-sectional study in a cohort of 106 SCD patients recruited from the Parirenyatwa Group of Hospitals in Harare, Zimbabwe. SCD diagnosis was based on several approaches: positive on hemoglobin electrophoresis or a positive sickle solubility test, the presence of sickle cells on a peripheral blood film and a past medical history with SCD disease symptoms (i.e., multiple presentations with painful crisis, need for blood transfusion for normocytic anemia associated with jaundice or history of dactylitis, stroke, acute chest syndrome, avascular necrosis of the bones). Both pediatric (0–17 years old) and adult (18–60 years) patients were recruited. SCD patients who were pregnant and patients who had undergone a previous stem cell transplantation for SCD were excluded from the study. In this observational study, the opioids used were as prescribed by the doctor based on the standard of care in the management of pain in Zimbabwean SCD patients. The choice of medication was based on disease severity, the medication's availability and effectiveness and the guidelines for pain management in the essential drug list for Zimbabwe. Genotyping was done retrospectively and was not intended to be used for guiding therapy but to identify opportunities for its potential application in patients with genotypes predictive of phenotypes requiring drug choice changes.

### Pain levels & episodes experienced by patients

Pain scores of study participants on pain medication were obtained from patient records. The pain scores were based on the numeric pain rating scale [[15](#B15)]. The scoring was categorized as none, mild, moderate or severe. The number of pain crisis episodes experienced within 6 months before recruitment was also documented. An episode of pain was defined as the occurrence of pain that could not be explained except by SCD. This was pain that occurred in the extremities, back, abdomen, chest or head that lasted for at least 2 h or led to a clinical visit [[16](#B16)].

### CYP2D6 genotyping

Genotyping for *CYP2D6* actionable variants was performed on the GenoPharm^®^ pharmacogenomics open array panel. GenoPharm^®^ is an open array panel that was designed and customized for AiBST, and it uses TaqMan Assay chemistry derived from the Applied Biosystems QuantStudio 12K Flex Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Genotyping was conducted according to the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, 6.8 μl of each 50 ng/μl DNA sample was added to 6.8 μl of the Open Array Genotyping Master mix in a 96-well plate, vortexed, centrifuged and then transferred to a 384-well plate. A no-template control and a positive control were also included on the plate. The contents of the 384-well plate were transferred to an open array plate (33 nl per well) using the robotic arm of the Applied Biosystems Accufill System. The analysis was conducted on the QuantStudio 12K Flex Real-Time PCR System using the manufacturer's predefined default PCR conditions for open array genotyping analysis. The calls post-run were made at cycle 40 using the default quality value of ≥0.95 to assign a genotype call.

### CYP2D6 copy number variation analysis

Copy number variation analysis for *CYP2D6* was performed, since the *CYP2D6* gene is highly prone to copy number variations. The Applied Biosystems TaqMan copy number assay for Exon 9 (Assay ID: Hs00010001_cn) was used to detect *CYP2D6* deletions and duplications. A duplex real-time PCR reaction was performed, with each DNA sample added to the CYP2D6 assay and the human TaqMan Copy number reference assay RnaseP (cat. no. 4403326) as the reference gene. The copy number assays for each sample, including the no-template control and the positive control, were run in quadruplicate in a 96-well plate normal reaction, according to the manufacturer's protocol. The DNA was initially diluted to 5 ng/μl in nuclease-free water to reach a total of 10 μl. An aliquot of 2 μl of the diluted DNA was added to a mixture of 10 μl TaqPath Pro-amp master mix and the reference assay. The reaction was run in quadruplicate for accuracy on the Applied Biosystems 7500 Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The thermal cycling conditions were as follows: initial denaturation at 95°C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 15 s and annealing and extension at 60°C for 60 s.

### UGT2B7 genotyping

Single assay genotyping of *UGT2B7* variants rs62296959 and rs73823859 was conducted on the Applied Biosystems 7500 Real-Time PCR System (Thermo- Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The DNA concentrations were initially diluted to 3 ng/μl before the addition of the reaction master mix and respective assays in the 96-well plate for analysis. The thermal cycling conditions were as follows: polymerase activation at 95°C for 10 min followed by 40 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 15 s and annealing/extension at 60°C for 1 min. Fluorescence measurements collected during the post-PCR plate read were used to plot the reporter signal normalized to the fluorescence signal of ROX™ (Rn) for each sample well. These data were used to determine the genotypes in the DNA samples.

### Data analysis

Genetic data analysis of raw *CYP2D6* data on the QuantStudio 12K Flex Real-Time PCR System utilized the Genotyper^®^ and CopyCaller^®^ software on the Real-Time instrument. The export of the raw data files to AlleleTyper™ software on the Thermo Fisher Scientific website gave an output of genotypes and copy number calls of each participant sample. The final export of the data files gave an output of the star-allele calls of the *CYP2D6* genotypes. Analysis of single assay genotyping of *UGT2B7* raw data was conducted on TaqMan^®^ Genotyper software created on 7500 Applied Biosystems™ Real-Time PCR system.

Participants' demographics were presented as mean ± standard deviation if the data were normally distributed and as median (interquartile ranges) if the data were not normally distributed for quantitative variables. For qualitative variables, respective frequencies are shown in percentage frequency. The normality of data was assessed using histograms and the Shapiro–Wilks test. Spearman rank correlation was performed to correlate morphine dosage, tramadol dosage, codeine dosage, age and BMI with pain levels recorded for participants. The Kruskal–Wallis test by rank was used in correlating the observed genetic variants in the study population with the pain levels of the participants. Statistical analysis was performed using R and Stata v15 statistical package. Data visualization was performed using PRISM software (GraphPad6, CA, USA) and Excel package. A p-value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant for all analyses.

## Results

### Demographics

A total of 106 participants of Shona ethnicity were recruited against a calculated sample size of 105. Of the participants, 88 were pediatric patients and 18 were adult patients ([Table 1](#T1)). In pediatrics, more males were present in the study population, with a percentage frequency of 56.8%, and more females were present in the adult study population, with a percentage frequency of 77.8%. There were 25% and 50% children and adults, respectively, who confirmed a family history of SCD. Fifty children and four adults took morphine for pain. Eleven adults were taking tramadol and five adults were taking codeine for pain. The geographical distribution of the study participants showed 31 participants (29.2%) from Mutoko, 23 participants (21.7%) from Mt. Darwin and 52 participants (49.1%) from other parts of Zimbabwe. There was geographical overlap between regions where participants reportedly came from with malaria-endemic regions.

### Table 1. . Study population characteristics.

| Variable | Pediatrics | Adults |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Demographics |  |  |
| Total number recruited (n, % frequency) | 88 (83.0) | 18 (17.0) |
| Age, years (mean, range) | 7 (4–10) | 31.3 (23.3–38.0) |
| BMI, kg/m2 (mean, range) | 15.6 (13.5–18.2) | 19.8 (18.3–21.1) |
| Females (n, % frequency) | 38 (43.2) | 14 (77.8) |
| Males (n, % frequency) | 50 (56.8) | 4 (22.2) |
| History of sickle cell disease in family (n, % frequency) | 22 (25.0) | 9 (50.0) |
| Pain intensity frequency |  |  |
| ≤3 pain episodes (n, % frequency) | 51 (73.9) | 9 (50) |
| >3 pain episodes (n, % frequency) | 18 (20.1) | 9 (50) |
| Comorbidities |  |  |
| Absence (n, % frequency) | 83 (94.3) | 10 (55.6) |
| Presence (n, % frequency) | 5 (5.7) | 8 (44.4) |
| Treatments |   |   |
| Hydroxyurea (n, % frequency) | 82 (93.2) | 15 (83.3) |
| Morphine (n, % frequency) | 50 (56.8) | 4 (22.2) |
| Tramadol (n, % frequency) | – | 11 (61.1) |
| Codeine (n, % frequency) | – | 5 (27.8) |
### Pain levels & episodes experienced by patients

The pain score levels in patients who still experienced pain after taking pain medications were recorded. The numeric rating levels were grouped into patients experiencing mild, moderate or severe pain. Tramadol and codeine were primarily prescribed to adult participants ([Table 1)](#T1). Five participants had mild pain, five had moderate pain and one still had severe pain levels after taking their prescribed tramadol doses. Concerning patients on morphine, one out of the five patients who still had pain after codeine dosing experienced moderate pain, while the other four had mild pain. A total of 14, 24 and 12 participants still experienced mild, moderate and severe pain postmorphine dosing, respectively. Pain severity was more prevalent in the young age groups, with many patients in the 0–9 age group. It should, however, be noted there were fewer patients in the older patient groups ([Table 2](#T2)). The same trend was also observed for the occurrence of pain episodes ([Table 1](#T1)) in the 6-month period prior to recruitment. Both pain score and pain crisis episodes were more variable in the aged 0–19 years patient group.

### Table 2. . Distribution of pain scores among 106 patients with sickle cell disease, according to age.

| Pain score | Age (years) |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   | 0–9 | 10–19 | 20–29 | ≥30 | Total n (%) |
| 0 (no pain) | 29 | 8 | 2 | 1 | 40 (39.2) |
| 1–3 (mild) | 12 | 3 | 0 | 5 | 20 (19.6) |
| 4–6 (moderate) | 14 | 10 | 3 | 3 | 30 (29.4) |
| ≥7 (severe) | 6 | 5 | 0 | 1 | 12 (11.8) |
| Patients (n) | 61 | 26 | 5 | 10 | 102 |
### CYP2D6 genetic frequencies in the Zimbabwean SCD population

The *CYP2D6* genotype frequencies observed in the study SCD population were subjected to Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium analysis using the χ^2^ ([Supplementary Table 1](https://www.futuremedicine.com/doi/suppl/10.2217/pgs-2023-0045/suppl_file/pgs-24-359-s1.docx)). All the observed and expected genotype frequencies were found to be in Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium with p-values less than 0.05. Phenotypes were predicted according to the allele functionality and the diplotype to phenotype tables on Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium and from other publicly available databases (PharmVar, PharmGKB). The normal metabolizers had the highest predicted phenotype frequency of 69.1%, followed by 23.7% and 7.2% for intermediate and ultrarapid metabolizers, respectively.

The allele frequencies were compared with those previously reported for Zimbabweans, sub-Saharan Africans, eastern and central/southern Asians, Americans and Europeans, and the results are summarized in [Table 3](#T3). Several alleles showed significant differences among populations and were more frequent among the African populations when compared with Americans, Europeans and Asians. For example, *CYP2D6*17* (15.9%) and **29* (12.9%) had higher allele frequencies in this study and in other Africans compared with Asians, Europeans and Americans (p < 0.05). The allele frequency of *CYP2D6*42* was also observed with a frequency of 0.5%, which is not observed in other populations, including the Zimbabwean, American, East Asian, European and sub-Saharan general populations ([Table 3](#T3)).

### Table 3. . Comparison of CYP2D6 population allele frequencies with other populations.

| CYP2D6 allele | This study | Zimbabwe | America | Central/South Asia | East Asia | Europe | Sub-Saharan Africa | p-value |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| *1 | 0.3247 | – | 0.5110 | 0.2870 | 0.2453 | 0.2827 | 0.078 | 0.227 |
| *2 | 0.1959 | 0.1850 | 0.2208 | 0.2948 | 0.1205 | 0.1856 | 0.1983 | 0.227 |
| *17 | 0.1598 | 0.1503 | 0.0048 | 0.0007 | 0.0001 | 0.0039 | 0.1929 | 0.227 |
| *29 | 0.1289 | 0.0954 | 0.0019 | 0.0027 | 0.0001 | 0.0011 | 0.1211 | 0.227 |
| *41 | 0.0567 | 0.0870 | 0.0233 | 0.1230 | 0.0227 | 0.0924 | 0.1147 | 0.227 |
| *5 | 0.0464 | 0.1156 | 0.0159 | 0.0459 | 0.0486 | 0.0295 | 0.0515 | 0.227 |
| *10 | 0.0412 | 0.0318 | 0.0144 | 0.0867 | 0.4356 | 0.0157 | 0.0557 | 0.227 |
| *2A | 0.0361 | 0.0173 | 0.0859 | 0.0819 | 0.0195 | 0.0908 | 0.0630 | 0.227 |
| *9 | 0.0155 | 0.0000 | 0.0044 | 0.0030 | 0.0019 | 0.0276 | 0.0000 | 0.2443 |
| *4 | 0.0052 | 0.0000 | 0.1024 | 0.0906 | 0.0054 | 0.1854 | 0.0338 | 0.227 |
| *42 | 0.0052 | 0.0000 | 0.0000 | 0.0030 | 0.0000 | 0.0000 | 0.0000 | 0.301 |
### UGT2B7 genetic frequencies in the Zimbabwean SCD population

A total of 106 DNA samples were genotyped using single assay genotyping for *UGT2B7* variants rs62296959 and rs73823859. The observations of genetic frequencies of *UGT2B7* rs62296959 showed that 92 (86.8%) of the participants had rs62296959 G/G genotype (homozygous wild-type) and 14 (13.2%) had rs62296959 G/A genotype (heterozygous with decreased function). The genotype rs62296959 A/A was not observed in the population. The frequency distribution of *UGT2B7* variant rs73823859 observed in the study population showed that 83 (78.3%) were homozygous G/G (normal type), 21 (19.8%) were heterozygous G/A and two (1.9%) were homozygous A/A. The genetic frequencies observed in this study were compared with genetic frequencies observed in other populations (Africa, America, Europe, East Asia and South Asia) using the χ^2^ test. There were no statistically significant differences observed in the study and other populations ([Table 4](#T4)). The genotype and allele data for comparison were obtained from *UGT2B7* rs62296959 and *UGT2B7* rs73823859 allele frequency tables from the 1000 Genome Database ([www.internationalgenome.org](https://www.internationalgenome.org)).

### Table 4. . Comparison of UGT2B7 population allele and genotype frequencies with other populations.

| Annotation | n | This study | Africa | America | Europe | East Asia | South Asia | p-value |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| rs62296959 | 106 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| G | 198 | 0.930 | 0.998 | 0.2208 | 0.859 | 0.998 | 0.976 | 0.157 |
| A | 14 | 0.060 | 0.002 | 0.0048 | 0.141 | 0.002 | 0.024 | 0.157 |
| G/G | 92 | 0.870 | 0.995 | 0.0019 | 0.730 | 0.996 | 0.953 | 0.199 |
| G/A | 14 | 0.130 | 0.005 | 0.0233 | 0.258 | 0.004 | 0.047 | 0.199 |
| A/A | 0 | 0.000 | 0.000 | 0.0159 | 0.012 | 0.000 | 0.000 | 0.199 |
| rs73823859 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| G | 186 | 0.880 | 0.952 | 0.967 | 0.961 | 1.000 | 0.991 | 0.157 |
| A | 187 | 0.120 | 0.048 | 0.033 | 0.039 | 0.000 | 0.009 | 0.157 |
| G/G | 83 | 0.780 | 0.906 | 0.939 | 0.922 | 1.000 | 0.984 | 0.199 |
| G/A | 21 | 0.200 | 0.091 | 0.055 | 0.078 | 0.000 | 0.014 | 0.199 |
| A/A | 2 | 0.020 | 0.030 | 0.006 | 0.000 | 0.000 | 0.002 | 0.199 |
### Genetic associations analysis in pain management

Spearman rank correlation using STATA statistical software was performed in obtaining the correlation coefficient of morphine, tramadol and codeine doses; BMI; and age with pain intensity levels observed and grouped in the study population. The most participants were on morphine, with drug doses ranging from 2.5 mg to 30 mg. Tramadol and codeine had few participants with different drug dosages administered to participants for the management of pain. Morphine doses showed a weak correlation with pain intensity levels. The correlation, however, still reached statistical significance with a p-value of 0.0183 and Spearman rank correlation coefficient of 0.3293. There was also a correlation of age with pain intensity levels observed, with a Spearman rank correlation coefficient of 0.3089 and a statistically significant p-value of 0.02. Association of tramadol doses and pain intensity levels was not statically significant (p = 0.633). No statistically significant correlation was also observed between codeine doses and pain intensity levels (p = 1) as well as BMI and pain intensity levels (p = 0.71). The Kruskal–Wallis equality-of-populations rank test was used to correlate the observed genotypes and the pain levels of participants who had been administered the pain drugs. There was no statistically significant correlation observed between the *CYP2D6* genotypes and the pain levels where the p-value was 0.6334 (p < 0.05). There was also no statistically significant correlation observed between *UGT2B*7 rs62296959 and pain levels where the p-value > 0.05. However, *UGT2B7* rs73823859 showed a statistically significant correlation with pain levels, with a strong correlation of 0.0454 (p < 0.05).

## Discussion

This study attempted to demonstrate the role of CYP2D6 and UGT2B7 in opioid metabolism in a Zimbabwean SCD cohort (n = 106). The authors determined the frequency of *CYP2D6* genetic variants that could influence the choice and dose of opioids in adult SCD participants and the frequency of UGT genetic variants in the use of morphine in pediatric and adult SCD participants. Self-reported pain scores were used as a surrogate to determine responses to morphine, tramadol or codeine. Pain severity and episodes were more prevalent in the younger age groups ([Tables 1](#T1) & [2](#T2)). Pain has been reported to increase in patients until the third decade before declining [[17](#B17)]. A possible explanation could be that patients with high pain rates die prematurely. The early mortality could also explain the few adults in this study. It was clear, however, that a significant number of the participants with pain continued to experience pain after the administration of analgesia. No meaningful correlation between pain intensity and medication (codeine or tramadol) could be made because of the small adult sample size (18 out of 106). Morphine was the most prescribed drug for pain management in this study. This can be attributed to the high frequency of the pediatric population recruited in the study as well as its effectiveness and strength as an analgesic. Pain intensity decreased with increases in morphine dosing, consistent with other reports [[18](#B18)]. A Zimbabwean population study also documented the prescription of these opioid drugs in titration to pain levels [[19](#B19)]. The current study found a correlation between age and pain levels. The pain levels decreased considerably in adults compared with children. This also describes the disparities in how adults may perceive and interpret pain differently than children do [[20](#B20)].

*CYP2D6 *5*, **17*, **29* and **42* alleles were of interest in this study relating to codeine and tramadol response. The *CYP2D6* alleles **17* and **29* result in decreased enzymatic activity and occur at high frequency in the sub-Saharan African population [[21](#B21)]. The **17* and **29* alleles were observed at a frequency of 15.9% and 12.9%, respectively, which is high compared with other populations ([Table 3](#T3)). However, the frequency was comparable to previously published general population Zimbabwean data [[21](#B21)]. The commonly found *CYP2D6*5* allele results in a nonfunctional enzyme [[22](#B22)] and occurred at a frequency of 4.6%. The frequency for rare *CYP2D6*42*, which also codes for a nonfunctional enzyme, was 0.5%. This is prevalent in the South/Central Asian population with an allele frequency of 0.3% ([Table 3](#T3)), which can be attributed to the presence of genetic admixtures in populations.

The normal metabolizers had the highest frequency (69.1%) in the population of SCD participants. *CYP2D6*1* is considered the normal allele associated with normal enzyme activity [[23](#B23)]. Participants homozygous for this allele are therefore expected to metabolize codeine and tramadol obtaining therapeutic levels. Ultrarapid metabolizers accounted for 7.2% of the sampled SCD patients. Ultrarapid metabolism is associated with an ~50% increase in codeine and tramadol metabolites [[24](#B24)]. Intermediate metabolizers had a frequency of 23.7%. Intermediate metabolizers have reduced CYP2D6 activity and produce less codeine and tramadol metabolites. This has been associated with a reduced analgesic effect [[25](#B25)]. The presence of reduced or nonfunctional *CYP2D6* variants is also associated with increased SCD patient pain thresholds when pain is managed with either codeine or tramadol [[26](#B26)]. There is a need to conduct clinical and/or bridging studies on people of African ancestry to understand the impact of standard dosing regimens without taking genetic polymorphisms into account. No statistically significant correlations, however, were observed between the *CYP2D6* genotypes and the pain levels (p = 0.6334). This might be attributed to the small number of participants on tramadol and codeine.

The *UGT2B7* variants rs62296959 and rs73823859 have been reported to have a high frequency in the African population [[27](#B27)]. The genetic frequencies of *UGT2B7* variants rs73823859 and rs62296959 ([Table 4](#T4)) were comparable to those previously reported for the African population [[28](#B28)]. The homozygous rs62296959 A/A genotype was not observed in this study population. This agrees with previous reports on the African population [[27](#B27),[29](#B29)]. *UGT2B7* polymorphisms have been reported to affect the analgesic effect of morphine [[30](#B30)]. There are, however, no UGT-based pharmacogenetic testing recommendations for morphine because of the absence of data around *UGT2B7* correlating with efficacy in drug metabolism. In addition, no clinical significance of *UGT2B7* rs62296959 in morphine drug metabolism has been reported [[29](#B29)]. No statistically significant correlation (p = 0.2268) was observed between *UGT2B7* rs62296959 and pain levels in the current study. This might describe the low effect of the genetic variant on the clinical outcome in patients on morphine. However, *UGT2B7* rs73823859 showed a statistically significant correlation with pain levels (p = 0.0454). Other studies had shown patients with the rs73823859 homozygous G/G to have lower pain levels as compared with those with rs73823859 G/A and A/A [[31](#B31)].

## Conclusion

Data from our study support that pharmacogenetic testing can be useful for optimizing pain management drug dosing. The correlation between genotype/phenotype and pain intensity levels for the *UGT2B7* rs73823859 variant could be useful for pharmacogenetic-guided dosing. Although this study uniquely involved Zimbabwean patients, it had a limitation of being small, involving both pediatric and adult patients. This was a pilot study with preliminary data supporting the potential usefulness of pharmacogenetic testing for optimizing pain management drug dosing. Based on current guidelines, up to 23.7% of intermediate metabolizers would benefit from dose selection decision to use nontramadol and noncodeine alternatives. More well-powered implementation studies for feasibility and effectiveness in SCD patients are warranted to confirm the current findings of this study in SCD pain management.

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgments

The authors would like to acknowledge all the study participants and their families, the study team, the staff at Parirenyatwa Group of Hospitals in Harare Zimbabwe and the Sickle Haemoglobinopathy Research in Zimbabwe (SHAZ) sickle cell registry, Pageneck Chikondowa and Tinashe Mazhindu for being actively involved in the recruitment of SCD participants, Comfort Kanji for assistance with the genotyping assays and the staff at the African Institute of Biomedical Science and Technology (AiBST). They would also like to acknowledge the Consortium for Genomics and Therapeutics in Africa: Collen Masimirembwa – Zimbabwe, Collet Dandara – South Africa, Oluseye Bolaji – Nigeria, Bernards Ogutu – Kenya, Ntokozo Ndlovu – Zimbabwe, Margaret Borok – Zimbabwe, Patience Kuona – Zimbabwe and Jonathan Matenga – Zimbabwe.

## Footnotes

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Supplementary Materials

### Supplementary Materials

## References

1. Sanyaolu A, Agiri E, Bertram C et al. Current modalities of sickle cell disease management. Blood Sci. 2(4), 109–116 (2020).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/BS9.0000000000000056) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8974986/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35400022/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Blood%20Sci.&title=Current%20modalities%20of%20sickle%20cell%20disease%20management&volume=2&issue=4&publication_year=2020&pages=109-116&pmid=35400022&doi=10.1097/BS9.0000000000000056&)

2. Kavanagh PL, Fasipe TA, Wun T. Sickle cell disease: a review. JAMA 328(1), 57–68 (2022).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2022.10233) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35788790/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=JAMA&title=Sickle%20cell%20disease:%20a%20review&volume=328&issue=1&publication_year=2022&pages=57-68&pmid=35788790&doi=10.1001/jama.2022.10233&)

3. Farrell AT, Panepinto J, Carroll CP et al. End points for sickle cell disease clinical trials: patient-reported outcomes, pain, and the brain. Blood Adv. 3(23), 3982–4001 (2019).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1182/bloodadvances.2019000882) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6963237/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31809538/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Blood%20Adv.&title=End%20points%20for%20sickle%20cell%20disease%20clinical%20trials:%20patient-reported%20outcomes,%20pain,%20and%20the%20brain&volume=3&issue=23&publication_year=2019&pages=3982-4001&pmid=31809538&doi=10.1182/bloodadvances.2019000882&)

4. Makani J, Ofori-Acquah SF, Nnodu O, Wonkam A, Ohene-Frempong K. Sickle cell disease: new opportunities and challenges in Africa. Sci. World J. 2013, 193252 (2013).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/193252) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3988892/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25143960/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sci.%20World%20J.&title=Sickle%20cell%20disease:%20new%20opportunities%20and%20challenges%20in%20Africa&volume=2013&publication_year=2013&pages=193252&pmid=25143960&doi=10.1155/2013/193252&)

5. Somogyi AA, Barratt DT, Coller JK. Pharmacogenetics of opioids. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 81(3), 429–444 (2007).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.clpt.6100095) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17339873/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin.%20Pharmacol.%20Ther.&title=Pharmacogenetics%20of%20opioids&volume=81&issue=3&publication_year=2007&pages=429-444&pmid=17339873&doi=10.1038/sj.clpt.6100095&)

6. Orhurhu MS, Chu R, Claus L et al. Neuropathic pain and sickle cell disease: a review of pharmacologic management. Curr. Pain Headache Rep. 24(9), 52 (2020).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11916-020-00885-5) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32705357/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr.%20Pain%20Headache%20Rep.&title=Neuropathic%20pain%20and%20sickle%20cell%20disease:%20a%20review%20of%20pharmacologic%20management&volume=24&issue=9&publication_year=2020&pages=52&pmid=32705357&doi=10.1007/s11916-020-00885-5&)

7. Crews KR, Monte AA, Huddart R et al. Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium guideline for CYP2D6, OPRM1, and COMT genotypes and select opioid therapy. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 110(4), 888–896 (2021).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/cpt.2149) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8249478/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33387367/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin.%20Pharmacol.%20Ther.&title=Clinical%20Pharmacogenetics%20Implementation%20Consortium%20guideline%20for%20CYP2D6,%20OPRM1,%20and%20COMT%20genotypes%20and%20select%20opioid%20therapy&volume=110&issue=4&publication_year=2021&pages=888-896&pmid=33387367&doi=10.1002/cpt.2149&)

8. Matic M, Nijenhuis M, Soree B et al. Dutch Pharmacogenetics Working Group (DPWG) guideline for the gene–drug interaction between CYP2D6 and opioids (codeine, tramadol and oxycodone). Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 30(10), 1105–1113 (2022).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-021-00920-y) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC9553935/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34267337/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur.%20J.%20Hum.%20Genet.&title=Dutch%20Pharmacogenetics%20Working%20Group%20(DPWG)%20guideline%20for%20the%20gene%E2%80%93drug%20interaction%20between%20CYP2D6%20and%20opioids%20(codeine,%20tramadol%20and%20oxycodone)&volume=30&issue=10&publication_year=2022&pages=1105-1113&pmid=34267337&doi=10.1038/s41431-021-00920-y&)

9. Willmann S, Edginton AN, Coboeken K, Ahr G, Lippert J. Risk to the breast-fed neonate from codeine treatment to the mother: a quantitative mechanistic modeling study. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 86(6), 634–643 (2009).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/clpt.2009.151) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19710640/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin.%20Pharmacol.%20Ther.&title=Risk%20to%20the%20breast-fed%20neonate%20from%20codeine%20treatment%20to%20the%20mother:%20a%20quantitative%20mechanistic%20modeling%20study&volume=86&issue=6&publication_year=2009&pages=634-643&pmid=19710640&doi=10.1038/clpt.2009.151&)

10. Lloyd RA, Hotham E, Hall C, Williams M, Suppiah V. Pharmacogenomics and patient treatment parameters to opioid treatment in chronic pain: a focus on morphine, oxycodone, tramadol, and fentanyl. Pain Med. 18(12), 2369–2387 (2017).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/pm/pnw317) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28339912/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pain%20Med.&title=Pharmacogenomics%20and%20patient%20treatment%20parameters%20to%20opioid%20treatment%20in%20chronic%20pain:%20a%20focus%20on%20morphine,%20oxycodone,%20tramadol,%20and%20fentanyl&volume=18&issue=12&publication_year=2017&pages=2369-2387&pmid=28339912&doi=10.1093/pm/pnw317&)

11. Thorn CF, Klein TE, Altman RB. Codeine and morphine pathway. Pharmacogenet. Genomics 19(7), 556–558 (2009).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0b013e32832e0eac) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19512957/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenet.%20Genomics&title=Codeine%20and%20morphine%20pathway&volume=19&issue=7&publication_year=2009&pages=556-558&pmid=19512957&doi=10.1097/FPC.0b013e32832e0eac&)

12. Whirl-Carrillo M, Huddart R, Gong L et al. An evidence-based framework for evaluating pharmacogenomics knowledge for personalized medicine. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 110(3), 563–572 (2021).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/cpt.2350) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8457105/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34216021/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin.%20Pharmacol.%20Ther.&title=An%20evidence-based%20framework%20for%20evaluating%20pharmacogenomics%20knowledge%20for%20personalized%20medicine&volume=110&issue=3&publication_year=2021&pages=563-572&pmid=34216021&doi=10.1002/cpt.2350&)

13. Whirl-Carrillo M, McDonagh EM, Hebert JM et al. Pharmacogenomics knowledge for personalized medicine. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 92(4), 414–417 (2012).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/clpt.2012.96) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3660037/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22992668/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin.%20Pharmacol.%20Ther.&title=Pharmacogenomics%20knowledge%20for%20personalized%20medicine&volume=92&issue=4&publication_year=2012&pages=414-417&pmid=22992668&doi=10.1038/clpt.2012.96&)

14. Reizine N, Danahey K, Schierer E et al. Impact of CYP2D6 pharmacogenomic status on pain control among opioid-treated oncology patients. Oncologist 26(11), e2042–e2052 (2021).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/onco.13953) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8571740/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34423496/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Oncologist&title=Impact%20of%20CYP2D6%20pharmacogenomic%20status%20on%20pain%20control%20among%20opioid-treated%20oncology%20patients&volume=26&issue=11&publication_year=2021&pages=e2042-e2052&pmid=34423496&doi=10.1002/onco.13953&)

15. Snyder D. Pain: clinical manual for nursing practice. By Margo McCaffery and Alexandra Beebe. St. Louis: C.V. Mosby Company, 1989, 353 pp. Cancer Nurs. 15(3), 211 (1992).  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Nurs.&title=Pain:%20clinical%20manual%20for%20nursing%20practice.%20By%20Margo%20McCaffery%20and%20Alexandra%20Beebe.%20St.%20Louis:%20C.V.%20Mosby%20Company,%201989,%20353%20pp&volume=15&issue=3&publication_year=1992&pages=211&)

16. Wilkie DJ, Johnson B, Mack AK, Labotka R, Molokie RE. Sickle cell disease: an opportunity for palliative care across the life span. Nurs. Clin. North Am. 45(3), 375–397 (2010).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cnur.2010.03.003) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2932707/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20804884/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nurs.%20Clin.%20North%20Am.&title=Sickle%20cell%20disease:%20an%20opportunity%20for%20palliative%20care%20across%20the%20life%20span&volume=45&issue=3&publication_year=2010&pages=375-397&pmid=20804884&doi=10.1016/j.cnur.2010.03.003&)

17. Platt OS, Thorington BD, Brambilla DJ et al. Pain in sickle cell disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 325(1), 11–16 (1991).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM199107043250103) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1710777/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N.%20Engl.%20J.%20Med.&title=Pain%20in%20sickle%20cell%20disease&volume=325&issue=1&publication_year=1991&pages=11-16&pmid=1710777&doi=10.1056/NEJM199107043250103&)

18. Ross JR, Rutter D, Welsh K et al. Clinical response to morphine in cancer patients and genetic variation in candidate genes. Pharmacogenomics J. 5(5), 324–336 (2005).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.tpj.6500327) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16103897/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics%20J.&title=Clinical%20response%20to%20morphine%20in%20cancer%20patients%20and%20genetic%20variation%20in%20candidate%20genes&volume=5&issue=5&publication_year=2005&pages=324-336&pmid=16103897&doi=10.1038/sj.tpj.6500327&)

19. Kuguyo O, Misi FD, Chibonda S, Matimba A, Nhachi C, Tsikai N. Pain management strategies among cervical cancer patients in Zimbabwe. Pain Manag. 11(6), 715–729 (2021).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2217/pmt-2020-0108) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34008417/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pain%20Manag.&title=Pain%20management%20strategies%20among%20cervical%20cancer%20patients%20in%20Zimbabwe&volume=11&issue=6&publication_year=2021&pages=715-729&pmid=34008417&doi=10.2217/pmt-2020-0108&)

20. Osunkwo I, Andemariam B, Minniti CP et al. Impact of sickle cell disease on patients' daily lives, symptoms reported, and disease management strategies: results from the international Sickle Cell World Assessment Survey (SWAY). Am. J. Hematol. 96(4), 404–417 (2021).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajh.26063) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8248107/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33264445/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Hematol.&title=Impact%20of%20sickle%20cell%20disease%20on%20patients'%20daily%20lives,%20symptoms%20reported,%20and%20disease%20management%20strategies:%20results%20from%20the%20international%20Sickle%20Cell%20World%20Assessment%20Survey%20(SWAY)&volume=96&issue=4&publication_year=2021&pages=404-417&pmid=33264445&doi=10.1002/ajh.26063&)

21. Mbavha BT, Kanji CR, Stadler N et al. Population genetic polymorphisms of pharmacogenes in Zimbabwe, a potential guide for the safe and efficacious use of medicines in people of African ancestry. Pharmacogenet. Genomics 32(5), 173–182 (2022).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0000000000000467) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35190514/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenet.%20Genomics&title=Population%20genetic%20polymorphisms%20of%20pharmacogenes%20in%20Zimbabwe,%20a%20potential%20guide%20for%20the%20safe%20and%20efficacious%20use%20of%20medicines%20in%20people%20of%20African%20ancestry&volume=32&issue=5&publication_year=2022&pages=173-182&pmid=35190514&doi=10.1097/FPC.0000000000000467&)

22. Gaedigk A, Simon SD, Pearce RE, Bradford LD, Kennedy MJ, Leeder JS. The CYP2D6 activity score: translating genotype information into a qualitative measure of phenotype. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 83(2), 234–242 (2008).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.clpt.6100406) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17971818/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin.%20Pharmacol.%20Ther.&title=The%20CYP2D6%20activity%20score:%20translating%20genotype%20information%20into%20a%20qualitative%20measure%20of%20phenotype&volume=83&issue=2&publication_year=2008&pages=234-242&pmid=17971818&doi=10.1038/sj.clpt.6100406&)

23. Kirchheiner J, Keulen JT, Bauer S, Roots I, Brockmöller J. Effects of the CYP2D6 gene duplication on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of tramadol. J. Clin. Psychopharmacol. 28(1), 78–83 (2008).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/JCP.0b013e318160f827) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18204346/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Clin.%20Psychopharmacol.&title=Effects%20of%20the%20CYP2D6%20gene%20duplication%20on%20the%20pharmacokinetics%20and%20pharmacodynamics%20of%20tramadol&volume=28&issue=1&publication_year=2008&pages=78-83&pmid=18204346&doi=10.1097/JCP.0b013e318160f827&)

24. Smith HS. The metabolism of opioid agents and the clinical impact of their active metabolites. Clin. J. Pain 27(9), 824–838 (2011).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/AJP.0b013e31821d8ac1) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21677572/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin.%20J.%20Pain&title=The%20metabolism%20of%20opioid%20agents%20and%20the%20clinical%20impact%20of%20their%20active%20metabolites&volume=27&issue=9&publication_year=2011&pages=824-838&pmid=21677572&doi=10.1097/AJP.0b013e31821d8ac1&)

25. Foster A, Mobley E, Wang Z. Complicated pain management in a CYP450 2D6 poor metabolizer. Pain Pract. 7(4), 352–356 (2007).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1533-2500.2007.00153.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17986163/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pain%20Pract.&title=Complicated%20pain%20management%20in%20a%20CYP450%202D6%20poor%20metabolizer&volume=7&issue=4&publication_year=2007&pages=352-356&pmid=17986163&doi=10.1111/j.1533-2500.2007.00153.x&)

26. Jannetto PJ, Bratanow NC. Utilization of pharmacogenomics and therapeutic drug monitoring for opioid pain management. Pharmacogenomics 10(7), 1157–1167 (2009).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2217/pgs.09.64) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19604091/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics&title=Utilization%20of%20pharmacogenomics%20and%20therapeutic%20drug%20monitoring%20for%20opioid%20pain%20management&volume=10&issue=7&publication_year=2009&pages=1157-1167&pmid=19604091&doi=10.2217/pgs.09.64&)

27. Fladvad T, Klepstad P, Langaas M et al. Variability in UDP-glucuronosyltransferase genes and morphine metabolism: observations from a cross-sectional multicenter study in advanced cancer patients with pain. Pharmacogenet. Genomics 23(3), 117–126 (2013).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0b013e32835ce485) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23277092/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenet.%20Genomics&title=Variability%20in%20UDP-glucuronosyltransferase%20genes%20and%20morphine%20metabolism:%20observations%20from%20a%20cross-sectional%20multicenter%20study%20in%20advanced%20cancer%20patients%20with%20pain&volume=23&issue=3&publication_year=2013&pages=117-126&pmid=23277092&doi=10.1097/FPC.0b013e32835ce485&)

28. Li J, Menard V, Benish RL et al. Worldwide variation in human drug-metabolism enzyme genes CYP2B6 and UGT2B7: implications for HIV/AIDS treatment. Pharmacogenomics 13(5), 555–570 (2012).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2217/pgs.11.160) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3390746/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22462748/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics&title=Worldwide%20variation%20in%20human%20drug-metabolism%20enzyme%20genes%20CYP2B6%20and%20UGT2B7:%20implications%20for%20HIV/AIDS%20treatment&volume=13&issue=5&publication_year=2012&pages=555-570&pmid=22462748&doi=10.2217/pgs.11.160&)

29. Sadhasivam S, Krekels EH, Chidambaran V et al. Morphine clearance in children: does race or genetics matter? J. Opioid Manag. 8(4), 217–226 (2012).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.5055/jom.2012.0119) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22941849/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Opioid%20Manag.&title=Morphine%20clearance%20in%20children:%20does%20race%20or%20genetics%20matter?&volume=8&issue=4&publication_year=2012&pages=217-226&pmid=22941849&doi=10.5055/jom.2012.0119&)

30. Ning M, Tao Y, Hu X et al. Roles of UGT2B7 C802T gene polymorphism on the efficacy of morphine treatment on cancer pain among the Chinese Han population. Niger. J. Clin. Pract. 22(10), 1319–1323 (2019).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.4103/1119-3077.269019) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31607718/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Niger.%20J.%20Clin.%20Pract.&title=Roles%20of%20UGT2B7%20C802T%20gene%20polymorphism%20on%20the%20efficacy%20of%20morphine%20treatment%20on%20cancer%20pain%20among%20the%20Chinese%20Han%20population&volume=22&issue=10&publication_year=2019&pages=1319-1323&pmid=31607718&doi=10.4103/1119-3077.269019&)

31. De Gregori M, Diatchenko L, Ingelmo PM et al. Human genetic variability contributes to postoperative morphine consumption. J. Pain 17(5), 628–636 (2016).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpain.2016.02.003) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26902643/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Pain&title=Human%20genetic%20variability%20contributes%20to%20postoperative%20morphine%20consumption&volume=17&issue=5&publication_year=2016&pages=628-636&pmid=26902643&doi=10.1016/j.jpain.2016.02.003&)

32. Gong L, Stamer UM, Tzvetkov MV, Altman RB, Klein TE. PharmGKB summary: tramadol pathway. Pharmacogenet. Genomics 24(7), 374–380 (2014).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0000000000000057) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4100774/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24849324/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenet.%20Genomics&title=PharmGKB%20summary:%20tramadol%20pathway&volume=24&issue=7&publication_year=2014&pages=374-380&pmid=24849324&doi=10.1097/FPC.0000000000000057&)
