# Three-dimensional modeling of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase-deficient variants from German ancestry.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Farooq Kiani, Sonja Schwarzl, Stefan Fischer, Thomas Efferth
**Journal:** PloS one
**Year:** 2007
**PMID:** 17637841

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** Loss of function of dimeric glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) represents the most common inborn error of metabolism throughout the world affecting an estimated 400 million people. In Germany, this enzymopathy is very rare.

**METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS:** On the basis of G6PD crystal structures, we have analyzed six G6PD variants of German ancestry by three-dimensional modeling. All mutations present in the German population are either close to one of the three G6P or NADP(+) units or to the interface of the two monomers. Two of the three mutated amino acids of G6PD Vancouver are closer to the binding site of NADP(+). The G6PD Aachen mutation is also closer to the second NADP(+) unit. The G6PD Wayne mutation is closer to the G6P binding region. These mutations may affect the binding of G6P and NADP(+) units. Three mutations, i.e. G6PD Munich, G6PD Riverside and G6PD Gastonia, lie closer to the interface of the two monomers. These may also affect the interface of two monomers.

**CONCLUSION:** None of these G6PD variants share mutations with the common G6PD variants known from the Mediterranean, Near East, or Africa indicating that they have developed independently. The G6PD variants have been compared with mutants from other populations and the implications for survival of G6PD variants from natural selection have been discussed.
