# Chronic hemolytic anemia is associated with a new glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase in-frame deletion in an older woman.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Licínio Manco, Janet Pereira, Luís Relvas, Umbelina Rebelo, Ana Isabel Crisóstomo, Celeste Bento, M Letícia Ribeiro
**Journal:** Blood cells, molecules & diseases
**Year:** 2011
**PMID:** 21397531

## Abstract

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, an X-linked disorder, is usually observed in hemizygote males and very rarely in females. The G6PD class 1 variants, very uncommon, are associated with chronic hemolytic anemia. Here we report a Portuguese woman who suffered in her sixties from a chronic hemolytic anemia due to G6PD deficiency. Molecular studies revealed heterozygosity for an in-frame 18-bp deletion, mapping to exon 10 leading to a deletion of 6 residues, 362-367 (LNERKA), which is a novel G6PD class 1 variant, G6PD Tondela. Two of her three daughters, asymptomatic, with G6PD activity within the normal range, are heterozygous for the same deletion. The patient's leukocyte and reticulocyte mRNA studies revealed an almost exclusive expression of the mutant allele, explaining the chronic hemolytic anemia. Patient whole blood genomic DNA HUMARA assay showed a balanced pattern of X chromosome inactivation (XCI), but granulocyte DNA showed extensive skewing, harboring the mutated allele, implying that in whole blood, lymphocyte DNA, with a very long lifetime, may cover up the current high XCI skewing. This observation indicates that HUMARA assay in women should be assessed in granulocytes and not in total leukocytes.
