# Molecular genetics of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency in Spain: identification of two new point mutations in the G6PD gene.

## Metadata
**Authors:** A Rovira, T Vulliamy, M A Pujades, L Luzzatto, J L Corrons
**Journal:** British journal of haematology
**Year:** 1995
**PMID:** 7577654

## Abstract

In order to explore the nature of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency in Spain, we have analysed the G6PD gene in 11 unrelated Spanish G6PD-deficient males and their relatives by using the polymerase chain reaction and single-strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) analysis combined with a direct PCR-sequencing procedure and PCR-restriction enzyme (RE) analysis. We have identified eight different missense mutations, six of which have been reported in previously described G6PD variants. In nine patients who had presented with acute favism we found the following mutations: G6PD A-376G-202A (four cases), G6PD Union1360T (two cases), G6PD Mediterranean563T (one case) and G6PD Aures143C (one case). In the remaining patient a novel A to G transition was found at nucleotide position 209 which has not been reported in any other ethnic group. This mutation results in a (70) Tyr to Cys substitution and the resulting G6PD variant was biochemically characterized and designated as G6PD Murcia. This new mutation creates a Bsp 1286I recognition site which enabled us to rapidly detect it by PCR-RE analysis. In two patients with chronic non-spherocytic haemolytic anaemia (CNSHA) we found the underlying genetic defects, as had been noted previously, to be located within a cluster of mutations in exon 10. One of them had the T to C transition at nucleotide 1153, causing a (385) Cys to Arg substitution, previously described in G6PD Tomah. The other, previously reported as having a variant called G6PD Clinic, has a G to A transition at nucleotide 1215 that produces a (405) Met to Ile substitution, thus confirming that G6PD Clinic is a new class I variant.
