# CYP2D6 Activity in Patients with Metastatic Breast Cancer Treated with Single Agent Tamoxifen: Results from ECOG-ACRIN E3108

## Metadata
**Authors:** Vered Stearns, Anne ONeill, Bryan P Schneider, Todd C Skaar, Minetta C Liu, Caroline Lohrisch, Matthew P Goetz, Carlos S Vallejos, Joseph A Sparano, Diego Villa, Paula Silverman, Puneet S Cheema, Dennis F Moore, Jr, George W Sledge, Jr
**Journal:** Breast cancer research and treatment
**Date:** 2024 Oct 21
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10549-024-07519-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10549-024-07519-z)
**PMID:** 39432161
**PMCID:** PMC12167464
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12167464/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12167464/pdf/nihms-2081435.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12167464/pdf/nihms-2081435.pdf)

## Abstract

**Purpose:** 
In tamoxifen-treated individuals, reduced-function genetic variants in the CYP2D6 gene or inhibition of the enzyme result in low circulating endoxifen concentrations. We assessed the impact of reduced CYP2D6 activity and circulating endoxifen concentrations on breast cancer outcomes.

**Patients and Methods:** 
Patients with locally advanced or stage IV hormone receptor-positive breast cancer were enrolled in this single arm phase II trial and received open label tamoxifen 20 mg PO daily. The primary objective was to assess CYP2D6 poor metabolizer (PM) vs intermediate and normal metabolizer status (IM+NM) with progression-free survival (PFS). CYP2D6 phenotype was determined from whole blood samples (Roche Amplichip), and secondary endpoint evaluated endoxifen concentrations determined from 3 month post registration plasma samples (Quest Diagnostics).

**Results:** 
From September 2010 to June 2013, 113 of planned 204 patients were registered to the trial and began protocol treatment. Accrual to the trial closed early due to lower-than-expected rate of CYP2D6 poor metabolizers. Median age was 62, 86% (97/113) were white, 33% (30/113) Hispanic, 83% (92/113) postmenopausal. Samples were evaluable for CYP2D6 in 75% (85/113) of patients (2/85 PM, 27/85 IM, and 56/85 NM). Median PFS for PM and IM+NM was 12.9 months and 6.9 months, respectively. Median PFS was 11.1 and 13.8 months respectively for patients with low (≤15.5) and high (>15.5) endoxifen concentrations (ng/ml).

**Conclusion:** 
We did not observe significant associations between CYP2D6 metabolizer status or endoxifen with PFS. Small sample sizes and barriers to adequate samples in this trial prohibited determination of relationship between these markers and PFS.

Keywords: Tamoxifen, Pharmacogenetics, CYP2D6, endoxifen

### Purpose:

In tamoxifen-treated individuals, reduced-function genetic variants in the *CYP2D6* gene or inhibition of the enzyme result in low circulating endoxifen concentrations. We assessed the impact of reduced CYP2D6 activity and circulating endoxifen concentrations on breast cancer outcomes.

### Patients and Methods:

Patients with locally advanced or stage IV hormone receptor-positive breast cancer were enrolled in this single arm phase II trial and received open label tamoxifen 20 mg PO daily. The primary objective was to assess CYP2D6 poor metabolizer (PM) vs intermediate and normal metabolizer status (IM+NM) with progression-free survival (PFS). CYP2D6 phenotype was determined from whole blood samples (Roche Amplichip), and secondary endpoint evaluated endoxifen concentrations determined from 3 month post registration plasma samples (Quest Diagnostics).

### Results:

From September 2010 to June 2013, 113 of planned 204 patients were registered to the trial and began protocol treatment. Accrual to the trial closed early due to lower-than-expected rate of CYP2D6 poor metabolizers. Median age was 62, 86% (97/113) were white, 33% (30/113) Hispanic, 83% (92/113) postmenopausal. Samples were evaluable for CYP2D6 in 75% (85/113) of patients (2/85 PM, 27/85 IM, and 56/85 NM). Median PFS for PM and IM+NM was 12.9 months and 6.9 months, respectively. Median PFS was 11.1 and 13.8 months respectively for patients with low (≤15.5) and high (>15.5) endoxifen concentrations (ng/ml).

### Conclusion:

We did not observe significant associations between CYP2D6 metabolizer status or endoxifen with PFS. Small sample sizes and barriers to adequate samples in this trial prohibited determination of relationship between these markers and PFS.

## INTRODUCTION

Tamoxifen remains a common endocrine intervention for women to treat all stages of hormone receptor-positive breast cancer and to decrease the incidence of the disease. In the adjuvant setting, tamoxifen is recommended for 5 to 10 years [[1](#R1)]. Compared to tamoxifen, aromatase inhibitors (AIs) are associated with a small proportional improvement in disease-free survival and minimal improvements in overall survival [[2](#R2), [3](#R3)]. Tamoxifen is prescribed widely around the world and remains a drug of choice for many premenopausal women and for those who are not able to tolerate AIs.

Several factors may influence tamoxifen effectiveness, including both tumor and host characteristics. Tamoxifen is metabolized to several estrogen-like and anti-estrogen metabolites. One of the metabolites, endoxifen, is highly dependent on functional hepatic CYP2D6 enzyme activity. Importantly, endoxifen has 100-fold greater affinity to the estrogen receptor compared to the parent drug tamoxifen, and is 5–7 times more abundant than the other active metabolite, 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen [[4](#R4)]. The pharmacogenetic data have led to several retrospective analyses to determine whether tamoxifen’s efficacy is impacted by polymorphisms in *CYP2D6* or drug-drug interactions that inhibit CYP2D6 activity. Published studies have demonstrated mixed results [[5](#R5)]. These conflicting reports may be explained in part due to retrospective clinical data review, inclusion of mixed populations of women with different menopausal status, who may or may not have received chemotherapy, and with different tamoxifen dose or treatment duration. Other common limitation of these studies are due to lack of availability of tamoxifen metabolite information, and inclusion of only archival paraffin blocks, thus not allowing for complex pharmacogenetic profiling.

A prospective study of adjuvant tamoxifen that compares long-term outcomes based on CYP2D6 activity would be the ideal way to test the impact of CYP2D6 activity. However, due to the widespread use of AIs, such a trial is very difficult to conduct. We initiated a prospective phase II study in patients who were candidates for single agent tamoxifen treatment in the metastatic setting to compare outcomes in those with and without reduced-function variants in the *CYP2D6* gene. We hypothesized that individuals who were CYP2D6 poor metabolizers (PM) would have a reduced progression-free survival (PFS) compared to those who were intermediate or normal metabolizers (IM+NM).

## PATIENTS AND METHODS

### Study Design and Participants

Men and women 18 years or older with a locally advanced or stage IV histologically-confirmed estrogen and/or progesterone receptor positive adenocarcinoma of the breast were eligible for E3108. Participants must have had measurable or non-measurable disease (where surgery was not possible) and an ECOG performance status of 0–2. Women could not have been pregnant or lactating. Prior systemic therapy for metastatic disease was allowed including the following: 1) agents that modulate or downregulate the estrogen receptor for breast cancer prevention or bone health were eligible if they were on treatment for at least 6 months, did not have a diagnosis of breast cancer on the medication, and had discontinued the agents 6 months prior to study registration; 2) prior AIs were allowed in the adjuvant and metastatic settings; 3) chemotherapy, trastuzumab, bevacizumab, or investigational agents in the adjuvant setting were allowed but must have been completed at least 4 weeks prior to study registration; and 4) no more than 2 lines of non-hormonal treatment in the locally advanced or metastatic setting. Participants must have had adequate hematologic and renal function at the discretion of the treating physician, total bilirubin ≤ 1.5 x upper limit of normal and SGPT (ALT) and SGOT (AST) ≤ 2.5 x upper limit of normal or ≤ 5 x upper limit of normal if they had liver metastases within 4 weeks prior to registration. Patients were not allowed the following CYP2D6 inhibitors: paroxetine, fluoxetine, bupropion and quinidine within 2 weeks of registration. Additional criteria are included in the clinical protocol ([Supplementary Document 1](#SD1)). In August 15, 2012, eligibility criteria were expanded in effort to increase overall accrual and to increase enrollment of patients classified as poor metabolizers. Specifically, hormone receptor status could be determined from a primary or recurrent site; agents that modulate or downregulate the estrogen receptor for breast cancer prevention or for bone health or given in adjuvant setting were allowed.

#### Treatment and Assessments

Open label tamoxifen 20 mg PO daily was prescribed until progression, unacceptable toxicities, withdrawal of consent, or medical necessity, or 5 years. A cycle was defined as 28 days of treatment.

Tumor assessment via CT/MRI was performed at baseline, then every 3 months until first disease progression. If a patient discontinued treatment for reasons other than progression, tumor was assessed every 3 months if the patient was < 2 years from study entry then every 6 months if patient was 2 to 5 years from study entry.

The trial was coordinated by the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group-American College of Radiology Imaging Network Research Group (ECOG-ACRIN), in collaboration with North Central Cancer Treatment Group (NCCTG), Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB), Southwest Oncology Group (SWOG), and National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP) and registered nationally on [ClinicalTrials.gov](http://clinicaltrials.gov) [NCT01124695](https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01124695). Written informed consent was obtained from all patients prior to registration.

#### Metabolizer Status

DNA was isolated from the baseline whole blood sample and used for *CYP2D6* genotyping on the CYP450 Amplichip (Roche Diagnostics, Inc) at Indiana University. CYP2D6 activity score (AS) was determined as previously described [[6](#R6), [7](#R7)]. For the analysis, we grouped the AS into three phenotype categories ([Supplementary Table 1](#SD2)): poor metabolizer (PM, two non-functional alleles, AS=0); Intermediate metabolizer (IM, AS=0.25–1.0); and Normal Metabolizer (NM, AS≥1.25) [[8](#R8)]. Ultra-rapid metabolizers (UM) (AS≥2.5) were grouped with normal metabolizers. At initiation of trial development, normal metabolizer was formerly classified as ‘extensive metabolizer’ (EM).

Endoxifen concentrations (ng/ml) were determined from plasma samples at end of cycle 3 (C3, 3 months post trial registration) using the Quest Diagnostics CLIA-approved assay.

#### Statistical Considerations

The primary objective was to evaluate the association of the CYP2D6 predicted phenotypes (based on *CYP2D6* genotypes grouped into the CYP2D6 metabolizer groups) with PFS, specifically to assess PFS between CYP2D6 PM and IM+NM. Overall accrual goal was N=240, assuming that 85% (204/240) would have samples evaluable for CYP2D6 activity. When disease in 180/204 patients progressed, there was 80% power to detect a hazard ratio (HR) of 2.09 and 1.95 comparing CYP2D6 PM to IM+NM (assuming CYP2D6 PM prevalences of 8% and 10% respectively, and using a log rank test with two-sided 5% type I error rate with patients followed at least 3 months). The following stopping rule was incorporated into the design given the low anticipated rate of patients with CYP2D6 PM status: if the rate of accrual of PM was less than 8% or less than 1 patient with a CYP2D6 PM per month in the first 18 months that the trial was open, accrual was to be suspended for further evaluation of feasibility.

Secondary endpoint included evaluation of endoxifen concentration with outcome. Analyses of the overall parent trial included all patients who began protocol treatment and who were classified as eligible by ECOG-ACRIN review. Analyses of biomarker data (CYP2D6 AS, endoxifen concentrations) included all patients who began protocol treatment, were classified as eligible by ECOG-ACRIN review, and who had evaluable samples for the particular marker. Best overall response (RECIST) was summarized as a rate. PFS was defined as time from study registration to first disease progression or death, or last follow-up, whichever occurred first. The Kaplan Meier method was used to estimate time-to-event distributions. Since the plasma for the tamoxifen metabolites was evaluated from samples at 3 months post registration, PFS analyses of endoxifen concentrations were performed using a landmark of 3 months (and excluding those patients whose PFS was censored or event prior to 3 months). Any p-values and confidence intervals reported are two-sided and at the 95% level respectively. Data cutoff date was November 2020.

## RESULTS

E3108 was activated September 21, 2010. None of the samples from the first 64 patients registered were classified as CYP2D6 PM. In August 2012, the eligibility criteria were amended in an effort to expand accrual and increase number of patients with CYP2D6 predicted phenotype PM. An additional 60 patients were registered with 2/60 classified as CYP2D6 PM. Given the slower than anticipated overall accrual, the lower than anticipated numbers of patients with samples classified as PM, and the limited evaluable sample availability for correlatives, the trial closed with N=124 accrued.

Of the 124 patients registered to E3108, 113 were classified as eligible and began protocol treatment. Median age was 62, 86% (97/113) were white, 33% (30/113) Hispanic, 83% (92/113) postmenopausal, and 48% (54/113) received a prior AI. Among 53 patients for whom prior tamoxifen use was available (collected after the trial was amended), 23% (12/53) received prior adjuvant tamoxifen, 4% (2/53) received tamoxifen for metastatic disease ([Table 1](#T1)).

### Table 1:

| Variable | Total (%) |
| --- | --- |
|   |  |
| Race |   |
| White | 97 (86) |
| Black | 6 (5) |
| Asian | 7 (6) |
| Other | 3 (3) |
| Ethnicity |   |
| Hispanic | 33 (30) |
| Non-Hispanic | 77 (70) |
| Missing | 3 |
| Age |   |
| Minimum | 36 |
| 25th percentile | 55 |
| Median | 62 |
| 75th percentile | 70 |
| Maximum | 94 |
| Sex |   |
| Male | 2 (2) |
| Female | 111 (98) |
| Menopausal Status |   |
| Postmenopausal | 92 (83) |
| Premenopausal | 12 (11) |
| Perimenopausal | 5 (4) |
| Male | 2 (2) |
| Missing | 2 |
| ECOG Performance Status |   |
| 0 | 43 (39) |
| 1 | 61 (55) |
| 2 | 7 (6) |
| Missing | 2 |
| Stage |   |
| III | 26 (23) |
| IV | 86 (77) |
| Missing | 1 |
| Most Extensive Primary Surgery |   |
| Partial mastectomy/lumpectomy/excisional biopsy | 37 (34) |
| Mastectomy | 22 (20) |
| None | 51 (46) |
| Missing | 3 |
| Disease-free Interval |   |
| Median (range) in months | 11.5 (0–251) |
| Missing | 34 |
| HER2 IHC |   |
| 0 | 47 (42) |
| 1+ | 32 (28) |
| 2+ | 22 (20) |
| Not done | 11 (10) |
| Missing | 1 |
| Prior RT |   |
| No | 68 (61) |
| Yes | 44 (39) |
| Missing | 1 |
| Prior Aromatase Inhibitor |   |
| No | 58 (52) |
| Yes | 54 (48) |
| Missing | 1 |
| Prior Non-hormonal Treatment Adjuvant Setting |   |
| No | 82 (73) |
| Yes | 30 (27) |
| Missing | 1 |
| Prior Non-hormonal Treatment Metastatic Setting* |   |
| No | 45 (87) |
| Yes | 7 (13) |
| Missing | 1 |
| Prior Bisphosphonate or Denosumab Adjuvant Setting |   |
| No | 102 (91) |
| Yes | 10 (9) |
| Missing | 1 |
| Prior Bisphosphonate or Denosumab Metastatic Setting |   |
| No | 65 (62) |
| Yes | 40 (38) |
| Missing | 8 |
| Prior SERM Treatment Adjuvant/Prevention/Bone Health Setting* |   |
| No | 41 (77) |
| Yes | 12 (23) |
| Prior SERM Treatment Locally Advanced/Metastatic Setting* |   |
| No | 51 (96) |
| Yes | 2 (4) |

Table 1 Caption: Baseline Demographics and Disease Characteristics (N=113, N (%) shown except continuous variables)

Median (range) number of tamoxifen cycles received on trial was 6 (1 to 60). The primary reasons protocol treatment was stopped were disease progression (77/113, 68%) and adverse events (11/113, 9.7%).

Among the 113 evaluable patients, best overall response (CR+PR) (95% Confidence Interval [CI]) was 11.5% (13/113; 95% CI, 6.3–8.9%); ninety-five patients experienced a PFS event, 6-month PFS was 51.4%, and median PFS was 6.9 (95% CI, 5.3–8.8) months; at a median follow-up of 51.7 months, median OS was 42.9 (95% CI, 33.2–57.2) months.

A baseline whole blood sample was evaluable for CYP2D6 phenotype in 75% (85/113) of patients who began protocol treatment and were classified as eligible by the ECOG-ACRIN Operations Office: 2/85 PM, 27/85 IM, 56/85 NM (NM includes 6 UM) ([Supplementary table 2](#SD2)). There was no significant association between CYP2D6 metabolizer status and PFS: median PFS 12.9 months (NA, NA) in PM compared to 6.9 months (95% CI, 4.4–8.5) in IM+NM (p=0.89 log rank test) ([Table 2](#T2)).

### Table 2:

| CYP2D6 Activity Score (AS) | N (%) | Number of PFS events | Median (months) (95% CI) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Poor metabolizer (PM) | 2 (2) | 1 | 12.9 (NA, NA) |
| Intermediate metabolizer (IM)^ | 27 (32) | 26 | 4.8 (2.7–13.8) |
| Normal metabolizer (NM) *^ | 56 (66) | 47 | 7.4 (4.9–10.3) |

Table 2 Caption: CYP2D6 Phenotype and PFS information

Samples for 65 patients were assessed for endoxifen concentration. Assessment of baseline characteristics between those with and without a sample is shown in [Supplementary Table 3](#SD2). A 3-month post registration (C3) sample was evaluable for endoxifen for 63 patients. The 3-month (C3) landmark analysis among N=43 (removing 20 patients whose PFS was censored or event prior to 3 months) showed endoxifen was not associated with PFS: median PFS estimates for patients with low (≤15.5 ng/ml) and high (>15.5 ng/ml) endoxifen concentrations (based on endoxifen concentration categorized at median), were 11.1 (95% CI, 5.3–19.3) and 13.8 (95% CI, 6.5–16.6) months respectively. The marker was also evaluated at a cutoff of 5.97, predictive in one study of an at-risk subgroup [[9](#R9)], however, there were only 4 patients of 43 with endoxifen <5.97 ([Table 3](#T3)).

### Table 3:

| Endoxifen Concentration | N | Number events | 6 month PFS | Median (95%CI) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ≤15.5^ | 22 | 20 | 67.9 | 11.1(5.3–19.3) |
| >15.5^ | 21 | 18 | 80.0 | 13.8 (6.5–16.6) |
| ≤5.97# | 4 | 4 | 75.0 | 18.4 (3.2–19.3) |
| >5.97# | 34 | 34 | 74.0 | 11.4 (8.5–16.4) |

Table 3 Caption: Endoxifen Concentration (ng/ml): Landmark PFS analysis (landmark=3 months): Proportion progression-free (N=43)*

Both CYP2D6 AS and endoxifen concentration (from C3) were available in 55 patients. As expected, CYP2D6 AS correlated with endoxifen: median concentrations at C3 were: 2.2, 12.3, and 17.8 ng/ml among CYP2D6 PM, IM, and NM (including UM’s) respectively ([Supplementary Table 4](#SD2)).

## DISCUSSION

Whether CYP2D6 AS is associated with differential outcomes in patients receiving tamoxifen for the treatment or prevention of breast cancer remains unclear. Our study did not meet its accrual goal, and we encountered several barriers obtaining adequate samples. Therefore, it is not possible determine whether CYP2D6 activity or endoxifen concentrations are significantly associated with PFS in individuals with advanced breast cancer treated with tamoxifen monotherapy.

Several small studies conducted over two decades evaluated the role of CYP2D6 AS or endoxifen concentration on breast cancer associated outcomes in a variety of settings. Due to variability in patient populations, treatment delivery and duration, interpretation of the data has been difficult. The International Tamoxifen Pharmacogenomics Consortium (ITPC) has performed a meta-analysis of 4,935 tamoxifen-treated breast cancer patients from 12 sites, and reported no CYP2D6 effect on outcomes but strong heterogeneity across sites. A *post hoc*–analysis of a group meeting strict criteria of postmenopausal women with estrogen receptor positive tumors who received tamoxifen 20 mg/day for 5 years (N=1,996) revealed a small yet statistically significant effect of CYP2D6 AS on invasive disease–free survival (HR 1.25; 95% CI, 1.06, 1.47; p=0.009) [[10](#R10)]. The ITPC dataset and analysis were associated with several limitations including variability of original study cohorts, mostly retrospective studies using samples of convenience, and exclusion of several large adjuvant trials containing tamoxifen arms. As the ITPC indicated, CYP2D6 AS as a predictor of tamoxifen-associated survival outcomes must be considered hypothesis generating, making the data difficult to interpret and implement [[11](#R11)].

Ideally, a prospective study testing CYP2D6 AS as a predictor of tamoxifen-associated survival outcomes will be performed. However, at the time of study design and in subsequent years, there has been increasing evidence of superiority of AIs in postmenopausal women, and ovarian suppression and tamoxifen or AIs in premenopausal women [[12](#R12), [13](#R13)]. Moreover, some clinical guidelines recommended consideration of CYP2D6 genotype IM and PM status may be candidate for alternative tamoxifen dosing or use of a different agent(s) [[14](#R14)–[16](#R16)]. Given the diminishing use of single agent tamoxifen in practice and the incorporation of available assays by some clinicians at the time of study conduct, we determined that an adjuvant study would have been difficult to perform. We therefore designed a study in the metastatic setting in individuals who have received prior AI therapy. Due to our concerns regarding a low percent of patients who have a low AS (PMs), and that clinicians may already be obtaining commercially available CYP2D6 assays to determine tamoxifen use, a stopping rule was incorporated to suspend accrual for further evaluation of feasibility if PM rate was lower than expected. Another limitation was that given the international nature of the study, it was both difficult to obtain samples in a timely fashion, or that a wrong sample type was collected for CYP2D6 determination, requiring a second collection. Indeed, we were required to halt study accrual, and ultimately terminated enrollment given the very small number of PMs.

We chose to evaluate *CYP2D6* genotypes for the primary endpoint, rather than endoxifen concentrations, for two main reasons. First, clinically, *CYP2D6 g*enotypes can be determined prior to starting patients on tamoxifen. In contrast, tamoxifen metabolite concentrations, including endoxifen, do not reach steady state until approximately 1 month of therapy. Second, the prior studies that have shown an association with CYP2D6 activity and outcomes were based on *CYP2D6* genotypes.

There are very few additional prospective experiences designed to evaluate the role of CYP2D6 genotype or phenotype and survival outcomes in tamoxifen-treated individuals. The CYPTAM investigators evaluated CYP2D6 activity and endoxifen concentrations in 667 women with breast cancer who were initiating tamoxifen or who have been on tamoxifen for fewer than 12 months. They have reported that low AS or endoxifen concentration were not associated with an inferior clinical survival outcome [[17](#R17)]. However, this study also had several limitations including transition of the majority of the patients the to an AI after 2 or 3 years of adjuvant tamoxifen [[18](#R18)].

While one study suggested that there may be an endoxifen threshold required for reduction of disease recurrence in women with early stage breast cancer [[9](#R9)], other studies did not demonstrate similar results. CYPTAM-2 was a multicenter prospective cohort study that included postmenopausal women starting tamoxifen 20 mg/day monotherapy in the neoadjuvant or first-line metastatic setting for an estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. The primary endpoint was to determine the objective response rate and secondary endpoints were to determine the clinical benefit, PFS, and tolerability of tamoxifen based on serum endoxifen concentrations after 3 months, other tamoxifen metabolites, and to CYP2D6 AS. Endoxifen concentrations were available for 247 of 297 participants (83%), and 209 had evaluable disease per protocol (85%). Overall objective response was not related to endoxifen concentration, and no associations were detected with endoxifen concentrations, other tamoxifen metabolites, or AS [[19](#R19)].

In conclusion, results from previous retrospective analyses reported possible association between CYP2D6 genotype or phenotype and outcomes in tamoxifen-treated individuals. E3108 prospectively evaluated the association between CYP2D6 AS or endoxifen concentrations and tamoxifen-associated outcomes, and like other available studies is associated with several limitations. Although our genotyping assay covers the most common functional *CYP2D6* genetic variants, there are other rare variants that were not tested and could have contributed to the outcomes. We also do not have a careful assessment of treatment adherence, and discontinuation of tamoxifen therapy could also contribute to the outcomes. In addition, half of the patients received prior aromatase inhibitor therapy that may reduce the chance of response to tamoxifen therapy. While some CYP2D6 inhibitors were excluded it is possible that certain patients have received an inhibitor during the study conduct. These limitations, and the multi-factorial nature of the determinants of treatment response, may also have contributed to our lack of an association. Thus, currently, our study does not provide sufficient evidence to support the use of CYP2D6 AS or endoxifen concentrations to guide tamoxifen monotherapy use in the palliative setting.

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgements

We thank the study participants, investigators and research teams. We acknowledge the contributions of the late Dr. David A. Flockhart to the initial design and concept of this trial. We thank Dr. Daniel Hertz and Dr. James Rae for helpful comments. We thank Ms. Judy Murray (Johns Hopkins) for assistance with protocol management.

### Funding

This study was conducted by the ECOG-ACRIN Cancer Research Group (Peter J. O’Dwyer, MD and Mitchell D. Schnall, MD, PhD, Group Co-Chairs) and supported by the National Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of Health under the following award numbers: U10CA180820, U10CA180794, UG1CA233196, UG1CA232760, and UG1CA233234. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. The study was also supported in part by the Susan G. Komen Foundation.

## Footnotes

## Data Availability Statement

The data that support the findings of this study will be made available, upon request, after the study primary results have been published online. Interested researchers can reach out to the corresponding author for details about data sharing requests. Requests have to be approved by the ECOG-ACRIN data sharing review committee.

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Supplementary Materials

### Data Availability Statement

The data that support the findings of this study will be made available, upon request, after the study primary results have been published online. Interested researchers can reach out to the corresponding author for details about data sharing requests. Requests have to be approved by the ECOG-ACRIN data sharing review committee.

### Supplementary Materials

### Data Availability Statement

The data that support the findings of this study will be made available, upon request, after the study primary results have been published online. Interested researchers can reach out to the corresponding author for details about data sharing requests. Requests have to be approved by the ECOG-ACRIN data sharing review committee.

## References

1. Burstein HJ, et al. , Adjuvant endocrine therapy for women with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer: american society of clinical oncology clinical practice guideline focused update. J Clin Oncol, 2014. 32(21): p. 2255–69.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2013.54.2258) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4876310/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24868023/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Adjuvant%20endocrine%20therapy%20for%20women%20with%20hormone%20receptor-positive%20breast%20cancer:%20american%20society%20of%20clinical%20oncology%20clinical%20practice%20guideline%20focused%20update&author=HJ%20Burstein&volume=32&issue=21&publication_year=2014&pages=2255-69&pmid=24868023&doi=10.1200/JCO.2013.54.2258&)

2. Dowsett M, et al. , Meta-analysis of breast cancer outcomes in adjuvant trials of aromatase inhibitors versus tamoxifen. J Clin Oncol, 2010. 28(3): p. 509–18.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2009.23.1274) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19949017/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Meta-analysis%20of%20breast%20cancer%20outcomes%20in%20adjuvant%20trials%20of%20aromatase%20inhibitors%20versus%20tamoxifen&author=M%20Dowsett&volume=28&issue=3&publication_year=2010&pages=509-18&pmid=19949017&doi=10.1200/JCO.2009.23.1274&)

3. Francis PA, et al. , Tailoring Adjuvant Endocrine Therapy for Premenopausal Breast Cancer. N Engl J Med, 2018. 379(2): p. 122–137.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1803164) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6193457/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29863451/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N%20Engl%20J%20Med&title=Tailoring%20Adjuvant%20Endocrine%20Therapy%20for%20Premenopausal%20Breast%20Cancer&author=PA%20Francis&volume=379&issue=2&publication_year=2018&pages=122-137&pmid=29863451&doi=10.1056/NEJMoa1803164&)

4. Stearns V, et al. , Active tamoxifen metabolite plasma concentrations after coadministration of tamoxifen and the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor paroxetine. J Natl Cancer Inst, 2003. 95(23): p. 1758–64.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djg108) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14652237/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Natl%20Cancer%20Inst&title=Active%20tamoxifen%20metabolite%20plasma%20concentrations%20after%20coadministration%20of%20tamoxifen%20and%20the%20selective%20serotonin%20reuptake%20inhibitor%20paroxetine&author=V%20Stearns&volume=95&issue=23&publication_year=2003&pages=1758-64&pmid=14652237&doi=10.1093/jnci/djg108&)

5. Helland T, et al. , Generating a Precision Endoxifen Prediction Algorithm to Advance Personalized Tamoxifen Treatment in Patients with Breast Cancer. J Pers Med, 2021. 11(3).  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/jpm11030201) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8000933/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33805613/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Pers%20Med&title=Generating%20a%20Precision%20Endoxifen%20Prediction%20Algorithm%20to%20Advance%20Personalized%20Tamoxifen%20Treatment%20in%20Patients%20with%20Breast%20Cancer&author=T%20Helland&volume=11&issue=3&publication_year=2021&pmid=33805613&doi=10.3390/jpm11030201&)

6. Gaedigk A, et al. , The CYP2D6 activity score: translating genotype information into a qualitative measure of phenotype. Clin Pharmacol Ther, 2008. 83(2): p. 234–42.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.clpt.6100406) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17971818/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Pharmacol%20Ther&title=The%20CYP2D6%20activity%20score:%20translating%20genotype%20information%20into%20a%20qualitative%20measure%20of%20phenotype&author=A%20Gaedigk&volume=83&issue=2&publication_year=2008&pages=234-42&pmid=17971818&doi=10.1038/sj.clpt.6100406&)

7. Borges S, et al. , Composite functional genetic and comedication CYP2D6 activity score in predicting tamoxifen drug exposure among breast cancer patients. J Clin Pharmacol, 2010. 50(4): p. 450–8.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1177/0091270009359182) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3816977/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20081063/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Pharmacol&title=Composite%20functional%20genetic%20and%20comedication%20CYP2D6%20activity%20score%20in%20predicting%20tamoxifen%20drug%20exposure%20among%20breast%20cancer%20patients&author=S%20Borges&volume=50&issue=4&publication_year=2010&pages=450-8&pmid=20081063&doi=10.1177/0091270009359182&)

8. Caudle KE, et al. , Standardizing CYP2D6 Genotype to Phenotype Translation: Consensus Recommendations from the Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium and Dutch Pharmacogenetics Working Group. Clin Transl Sci, 2020. 13(1): p. 116–124.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/cts.12692) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6951851/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31647186/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Transl%20Sci&title=Standardizing%20CYP2D6%20Genotype%20to%20Phenotype%20Translation:%20Consensus%20Recommendations%20from%20the%20Clinical%20Pharmacogenetics%20Implementation%20Consortium%20and%20Dutch%20Pharmacogenetics%20Working%20Group&author=KE%20Caudle&volume=13&issue=1&publication_year=2020&pages=116-124&pmid=31647186&doi=10.1111/cts.12692&)

9. Madlensky L, et al. , Tamoxifen metabolite concentrations, CYP2D6 genotype, and breast cancer outcomes. Clin Pharmacol Ther, 2011. 89(5): p. 718–25.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/clpt.2011.32) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3081375/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21430657/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Pharmacol%20Ther&title=Tamoxifen%20metabolite%20concentrations,%20CYP2D6%20genotype,%20and%20breast%20cancer%20outcomes&author=L%20Madlensky&volume=89&issue=5&publication_year=2011&pages=718-25&pmid=21430657&doi=10.1038/clpt.2011.32&)

10. Province MA, et al. , CYP2D6 genotype and adjuvant tamoxifen: meta-analysis of heterogeneous study populations. Clin Pharmacol Ther, 2014. 95(2): p. 216–27.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/clpt.2013.186) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3904554/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24060820/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Pharmacol%20Ther&title=CYP2D6%20genotype%20and%20adjuvant%20tamoxifen:%20meta-analysis%20of%20heterogeneous%20study%20populations&author=MA%20Province&volume=95&issue=2&publication_year=2014&pages=216-27&pmid=24060820&doi=10.1038/clpt.2013.186&)

11. Province MA, Altman RB, and Klein TE, Interpreting the CYP2D6 results from the International Tamoxifen Pharmacogenetics Consortium. Clin Pharmacol Ther, 2014. 96(2): p. 144–6.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/clpt.2014.100) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4147833/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25056393/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Pharmacol%20Ther&title=Interpreting%20the%20CYP2D6%20results%20from%20the%20International%20Tamoxifen%20Pharmacogenetics%20Consortium&author=MA%20Province&author=RB%20Altman&author=TE%20Klein&volume=96&issue=2&publication_year=2014&pages=144-6&pmid=25056393&doi=10.1038/clpt.2014.100&)

12. Burstein HJ, et al. , American Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline: update on adjuvant endocrine therapy for women with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer. J Clin Oncol, 2010. 28(23): p. 3784–96.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2009.26.3756) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5569672/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20625130/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=American%20Society%20of%20Clinical%20Oncology%20clinical%20practice%20guideline:%20update%20on%20adjuvant%20endocrine%20therapy%20for%20women%20with%20hormone%20receptor-positive%20breast%20cancer&author=HJ%20Burstein&volume=28&issue=23&publication_year=2010&pages=3784-96&pmid=20625130&doi=10.1200/JCO.2009.26.3756&)

13. Burstein HJ, et al. , Adjuvant Endocrine Therapy for Women With Hormone Receptor-Positive Breast Cancer: ASCO Clinical Practice Guideline Focused Update. J Clin Oncol, 2019. 37(5): p. 423–438.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.18.01160) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30452337/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Adjuvant%20Endocrine%20Therapy%20for%20Women%20With%20Hormone%20Receptor-Positive%20Breast%20Cancer:%20ASCO%20Clinical%20Practice%20Guideline%20Focused%20Update&author=HJ%20Burstein&volume=37&issue=5&publication_year=2019&pages=423-438&pmid=30452337&doi=10.1200/JCO.18.01160&)

14. Goetz MP, et al. , Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (CPIC) Guideline for CYP2D6 and Tamoxifen Therapy. Clin Pharmacol Ther, 2018. 103(5): p. 770–777.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/cpt.1007) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5931215/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29385237/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Pharmacol%20Ther&title=Clinical%20Pharmacogenetics%20Implementation%20Consortium%20(CPIC)%20Guideline%20for%20CYP2D6%20and%20Tamoxifen%20Therapy&author=MP%20Goetz&volume=103&issue=5&publication_year=2018&pages=770-777&pmid=29385237&doi=10.1002/cpt.1007&)

15. Hertz DL, et al. , Tamoxifen Dose Escalation in Patients With Diminished CYP2D6 Activity Normalizes Endoxifen Concentrations Without Increasing Toxicity. Oncologist, 2016. 21(7): p. 795–803.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1634/theoncologist.2015-0480) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4943390/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27226358/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Oncologist&title=Tamoxifen%20Dose%20Escalation%20in%20Patients%20With%20Diminished%20CYP2D6%20Activity%20Normalizes%20Endoxifen%20Concentrations%20Without%20Increasing%20Toxicity&author=DL%20Hertz&volume=21&issue=7&publication_year=2016&pages=795-803&pmid=27226358&doi=10.1634/theoncologist.2015-0480&)

16. Dezentje VO, et al. , CYP2D6 genotype- and endoxifen-guided tamoxifen dose escalation increases endoxifen serum concentrations without increasing side effects. Breast Cancer Res Treat, 2015. 153(3): p. 583–90.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10549-015-3562-5) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4589558/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26369533/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Breast%20Cancer%20Res%20Treat&title=CYP2D6%20genotype-%20and%20endoxifen-guided%20tamoxifen%20dose%20escalation%20increases%20endoxifen%20serum%20concentrations%20without%20increasing%20side%20effects&author=VO%20Dezentje&volume=153&issue=3&publication_year=2015&pages=583-90&pmid=26369533&doi=10.1007/s10549-015-3562-5&)

17. Sanchez-Spitman A, et al. , Tamoxifen Pharmacogenetics and Metabolism: Results From the Prospective CYPTAM Study. J Clin Oncol, 2019. 37(8): p. 636–646.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.18.00307) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30676859/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=Tamoxifen%20Pharmacogenetics%20and%20Metabolism:%20Results%20From%20the%20Prospective%20CYPTAM%20Study&author=A%20Sanchez-Spitman&volume=37&issue=8&publication_year=2019&pages=636-646&pmid=30676859&doi=10.1200/JCO.18.00307&)

18. Stearns V, The End of ENDoxifen Metabolite and CYP2D6 Testing in Tamoxifen-Treated Women?. 2019, J Clin Oncol  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Oncol&title=The%20End%20of%20ENDoxifen%20Metabolite%20and%20CYP2D6%20Testing%20in%20Tamoxifen-Treated%20Women?&author=V%20Stearns&publication_year=2019&)

19. Neven P, et al. , Tamoxifen Metabolism and Efficacy in Breast Cancer: A Prospective Multicenter Trial. Clin Cancer Res, 2018. 24(10): p. 2312–2318.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-17-3028) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29459457/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Cancer%20Res&title=Tamoxifen%20Metabolism%20and%20Efficacy%20in%20Breast%20Cancer:%20A%20Prospective%20Multicenter%20Trial&author=P%20Neven&volume=24&issue=10&publication_year=2018&pages=2312-2318&pmid=29459457&doi=10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-17-3028&)
