# Prevalence and significance of CYP2C19*2 and CYP2C19*17 alleles in a New Zealand acute coronary syndrome population.

## Metadata
**Authors:** P D Larsen, L R Johnston, A Holley, A C La Flamme, L Smyth, E W Chua, M A Kennedy, S A Harding
**Journal:** Internal medicine journal
**Year:** 2015
**PMID:** 25583161

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** High on-treatment platelet reactivity has been associated with poor outcomes following acute coronary syndromes (ACS). Both the loss of function CYP2C19*2 allele and the gain of function CYP2C19*17 allele along with a range of clinical characteristics have been associated with variation in the response to clopidogrel.

**AIM:** The study aims to examine the frequency of CYP2C19 variants and understand the factors associated with on-treatment platelet reactivity in a New Zealand ACS population.

**METHODS:** We prospectively enrolled 312 ACS patients. We collected clinical characteristics and measured on-treatment platelet reactivity using two validated point-of-care assays, VerifyNow and Multiplate. DNA was extracted and CYP2C19*2 and *17 alleles were identified using real-time polymerase chain reaction.

**RESULTS:** CYP2C19*2 or CYP2C19*17 alleles were observed in 101 (32%) and 106 (34%) of patients, respectively, with significant differences in distribution by ethnicity. In Maori and Pacific Island patients, 47% (confidence interval (CI) 31-63%) had CYP2C19*2 and 11% (CI 4-19%) CYP2C19*17 compared with 26% (CI 19-32%) and 41% (CI 32-49%) in white people. Carriage of CYP2C19*2 alleles was associated with higher levels of platelet reactivity measured by either assay, but we observed no relationship between platelet reactivity and CYP2C19*17. In multivariate analysis diabetes, clopidogrel dose and CYP2C19*2 status were all significant independent predictors of platelet reactivity.

**CONCLUSIONS:** Both CYP2C19*2 and *17 were common in a New Zealand ACS population, with CYP2C19*2 observed in almost half the Maori and Pacific Island patients. CYP2C19*2, diabetes and clopidogrel dose were independent contributors to on-treatment platelet reactivity.
