# Contributions of CYP2C9/CYP2C19 genotypes and drug interaction to the phenytoin treatment in the Korean epileptic patients in the clinical setting.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Soo-Youn Lee, Seung-Tae Lee, Jong-Won Kim
**Journal:** Journal of biochemistry and molecular biology
**Year:** 2007
**PMID:** 17562299

## Abstract

We examined the contribution of CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 genotypes and drug interactions to the phenytoin metabolism among 97 Korean epileptic patients to determine if pharmacogenetic testing could be utilized in routine clinical practice. The CYP2C9 polymorphism is a wellknown major genetic factor responsible for phenytoin metabolism. The CYP219 polymorphism, with a high incidence of variant alleles, has a minor influence on phenytoin treated Koran patients. Using a multiple regression model for evaluation of the CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 genotypes, together with other non-genetic variables, we explained 39.6% of the variance in serum phenytoin levels. Incorporation of genotyping for CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 into a clinical practice may be of some help in the determination of phenytoin dosage. However, because concurrent drug treatment is common in patients taking phenytoin and many environmental factors are likely to play a role in drug metabolism, these factors may overwhelm the relevance of CYP polymorphisms in the clinical setting. Further investigations with an approach to dose assessment that includes comprehensive interpretation of both pharmacogenetic and pharmacokinetic data along with understanding of the mechanism of drug interactions in dosage adjustment is warranted.
