# Molecular basis and enzymatic properties of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase volendam, leading to chronic nonspherocytic anemia, granulocyte dysfunction, and increased susceptibility to infections.

## Metadata
**Authors:** D Roos, R van Zwieten, J T Wijnen, F Gómez-Gallego, M de Boer, D Stevens, C J Pronk-Admiraal, T de Rijk, C J van Noorden, R S Weening, T J Vulliamy, J E Ploem, P J Mason, J M Bautista, P M Khan, E Beutler
**Journal:** Blood
**Year:** 1999
**PMID:** 10556177

## Abstract

We have investigated the blood cells from a woman with a low degree of chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia and frequent bacterial infections accompanied by icterus and anemia. The activity of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) in her red blood cells (RBCs) was below detection level, and in her leukocytes less than 3% of normal. In cultured skin fibroblasts, G6PD activity was approximately 15% of normal, with 4- to 5-fold increased Michaelis constant (Km) for NADP and for glucose 6-phosphate. Activated neutrophils showed a decreased respiratory burst. Family studies showed normal G6PD activity in the RBCs from all family members, including both parents and the 2 daughters of the patient. Sequencing of polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-amplified genomic DNA showed a novel, heterozygous 514C-->T mutation, predicting a Pro172-->Ser replacement. Analysis of G6PD RNA from the patient's leukocytes and fibroblasts showed only transcripts with the 514C-->T mutation. This was explained by the pattern of X-chromosome inactivation, studied by means of the human androgen receptor (HUMARA) assay, which proved to be skewed in the patient, her mother, and one of the patient's daughters. Thus, the patient has inherited a de novo mutation in G6PD from her father and an X-chromosome inactivation determinant from her mother, causing exclusive expression of the mutated G6PD allele. Purified mutant protein from an Escherichia coli expression system showed strongly decreased specific activity, increased Km for NADP and for glucose 6-phosphate, and increased heat lability, which indicates that the defective phenotype is due to 2 synergistic molecular dysfunctions: decreased catalytic efficiency and protein instability.
