# Two new mutations of the glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) gene associated with haemolytic anaemia: clinical, biochemical and molecular relationships.

## Metadata
**Authors:** R Zarza, A Pujades, A Rovira, R Saavedra, J Fernandez, M Aymerich, J L Vives Corrons
**Journal:** British journal of haematology
**Year:** 1997
**PMID:** 9332310

## Abstract

In two unrelated Spanish males with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency and haemolytic anaemia, and two different novel point mutations in the G6PD gene, have been identified. A C to T transition at nucleotide 406 resulting in a (136) Arg to Cys substitution and a C to G transition at nucleotide 1155 resulting in a (385) Cys to Trp substitution. These two molecular defects have not been described before and are designated G6PD Valladolid 406 C-->T and G6PD Madrid 1155 C-->G. In vitro biochemical characterization of both mutant enzymes showed important differences in their molecular properties according to their different clinical behaviour. In G6PD Valladolid, the mutation of which is located in exon 5, the normal in vitro heat stability may explain its mild clinical expression (low-grade haemolysis interrupted by an acute haemolytic crisis at age 70). In G6PD Madrid, the mutation, located in exon 10, results in a deficient variant associated with neonatal jaundice and life-long chronic nonspherocytic haemolytic anaemia (CNSHA). This finding further emphasizes the importance of this specific region of the G6PD gene in the stabilization of the G6PD molecule. Putative relationships between these single point mutations and the molecular properties of the mutant enzymes are also discussed.
