# Genetic Profiles of Korean Patients With Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Jaewoong Lee, Joonhong Park, Hayoung Choi, Jiyeon Kim, Ahlm Kwon, Woori Jang, Hyojin Chae, Myungshin Kim, Yonggoo Kim, Jae Wook Lee, Nack Gyun Chung, Bin Cho
**Journal:** Annals of laboratory medicine
**Year:** 2017
**PMID:** 28028996

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** We describe the genetic profiles of Korean patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiencies and the effects of G6PD mutations on protein stability and enzyme activity on the basis of in silico analysis.

**METHODS:** In parallel with a genetic analysis, the pathogenicity of G6PD mutations detected in Korean patients was predicted in silico. The simulated effects of G6PD mutations were compared to the WHO classes based on G6PD enzyme activity. Four previously reported mutations and three newly diagnosed patients with missense mutations were estimated.

**RESULTS:** One novel mutation (p.Cys385Gly, labeled G6PD Kangnam) and two known mutations [p.Ile220Met (G6PD São Paulo) and p.Glu416Lys (G6PD Tokyo)] were identified in this study. G6PD mutations identified in Koreans were also found in Brazil (G6PD São Paulo), Poland (G6PD Seoul), United States of America (G6PD Riley), Mexico (G6PD Guadalajara), and Japan (G6PD Tokyo). Several mutations occurred at the same nucleotide, but resulted in different amino acid residue changes in different ethnic populations (p.Ile380 variant, G6PD Calvo Mackenna; p.Cys385 variants, Tomah, Madrid, Lynwood; p.Arg387 variant, Beverly Hills; p.Pro396 variant, Bari; and p.Pro396Ala in India). On the basis of the in silico analysis, Class I or II mutations were predicted to be highly deleterious, and the effects of one Class IV mutation were equivocal.

**CONCLUSIONS:** The genetic profiles of Korean individuals with G6PD mutations indicated that the same mutations may have arisen by independent mutational events, and were not derived from shared ancestral mutations. The in silico analysis provided insight into the role of G6PD mutations in enzyme function and stability.
