# Molecular study of eight Japanese cases of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency by nonradioisotopic single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis.

## Metadata
**Authors:** A Hirono, S Miwa, H Fujii, F Ishida, K Yamada, K Kubota
**Journal:** Blood
**Year:** 1994
**PMID:** 8193373

## Abstract

Using a newly developed nonradioisotopic method of polymerase chain reaction single-strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) analysis combined with the direct sequencing using the fluorescence-labeled terminator, we identified seven missense mutations, 527 A-->G, 1003 G-->A, 1159 C-->T, 1160 G-->A, 1229 G-->A, 1246 G-->A, and 1361 G-->A, in eight Japanese patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. Except for the 527 A-->G, each mutation has been reported to cause variants G6PD Chatham, G6PD Guadalajara, G6PD Beverly Hills, G6PD "Japan", G6PD Tokyo, and G6PD Andalus, respectively. In addition, a single base deletion in intron 5 was found in the patients with G6PD Guadalajara or G6PD Andalus. The variant with unique 527 A-->G was characterized and designated as G6PD Shinshu. We also characterized G6PD "Japan" and found that the variant had the striking resemblance with G6PD Riverside, bearing a missense mutation in the same codon, but causing a different amino acid substitution. Our modified PCR-SSCP analysis using minigel and ethidium bromide staining could detect six of the eight diverse mutations in the G6PD gene. Because it is easy and requires no special apparatus, this modified method will be useful for screening mutations in the G6PD gene.
