# Marked decrease in specific activity contributes to disease phenotype in two human glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase mutants, G6PD(Union) and G6PD(Andalus).

## Metadata
**Authors:** Xiao-Tao Wang, Veronica M S Lam, Paul C Engel
**Journal:** Human mutation
**Year:** 2005
**PMID:** 16088936

## Abstract

Clones overexpressing clinical glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) mutants Union (c.1360C>T/p.Arg454Cys) and Andalus (c.1361G>A/p.Arg454His), have been constructed. These abolish a salt bridge between Arg454 and Asp 286. One mutant is reportedly a Class II clinical variant and the other a Class I. Kinetic studies of the purified proteins reveal that, for both mutants, kcat is about 10-fold decreased, thus giving a 90% decrease in the WHO assay, and also presumably under physiological conditions. In contrast with unfavourable changes in Vmax for both mutants, Km values for both G6P and NADP+ are decreased approximately 5-fold. Measurements with alternative substrates confirm that G6PD Union, like the wild-type enzyme, follows a rapid-equilibrium random-order mechanism, allowing calculation of enzyme-substrate dissociation constants from initial-rate parameters. The mutations result in several-fold tighter binding of glucose 6-phosphate to the free enzyme. Binding, however, is clearly less productive than with normal enzyme. G6PD mutations are thought to cause haemolytic anaemia by compromising enzyme stability. Both these mutants indeed show somewhat decreased thermostability. However, at 37 degrees C and with NADP+, the stability differences are only moderate. Decreased catalytic efficiency clearly contributes to the disease phenotype of these two mutants, entirely accounting for reported decrease in leukocyte G6PD levels, though not for still lower levels in erythrocytes. Neither the kinetic nor the stability effects appear to justify the different clinical classification of these mutations.
