# A pedigree analysis of Rotor hyperbilirubinemia combined with hepatitis B virus infection in a 

## Metadata
**Authors:** Li-Zhen Lin, Qiu-Yan Wu, Jian-Hui Zhang, Shi-Jie Li, Wei-Zhen Wu, Dan-Dan Ruan, Min Wu, Qian Chen, Li-Sheng Liao, Zhu-Ting Fang, Jie-Wei Luo, Zuo-An Li, Zhou Li, Hong Li
**Journal:** Heliyon
**Year:** 2024
**PMID:** 39071607

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** Rotor syndrome (RS, OMIM#237450) is an extremely rare autosomal digenic recessive disorder characterized by mild non-hemolytic hereditary conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, caused by biallelic variation of SLCO1B1 and SLCO1B3 genes that resulted in OATP1B1/B3 dysfunction in the sinusoidal membrane leading to impaired bilirubin reuptake ability of hepatocytes.

**METHODS:** One RS pedigree was recruited and clinical features were documented. Whole genome second-generation sequencing was used to screen candidate genes and mutations, Sanger sequencing confirmed predicted mutations.

**RESULTS:** This study detected a homozygous nonsense variant c.1738C > T (p.R580*) in the coding region of the SLCO1B1 (NM006446) gene in a family with RS and hepatitis B virus infection by Variants analysis and Sanger sequencing, and confirmed by Copy Number Variation (CNV) analysis and Long Range PCR that there was a homozygous insertion of intron 5 of the SLCO1B3 gene into intron 5 of long-interspersed element 1 (LINE1). A few cases of such haplotypes have been reported in East Asian populations. A hepatitis B virus infection with fatty liver disease was indicated by pathology, which revealed mild-moderate lobular inflammation, moderate lobular inflammation, moderate hepatocellular steatosis, and fibrosis stage 1-2 (NAS score: 4 points/S1-2) alterations. Heterozygotes carrying p.R580* and LINE1 insertions were also detected in family members (I1, I2, III2, III3), but they did not develop conjugated hyperbilirubinemia.

**CONCLUSION:** The mutations may be the molecular genetic foundation for the presence of SLCO1B1 c.1738C > T(p.R580*) and SLCO1B3 (LINE1) in this RS pedigree.
