# CYP4F2 rs2108622: a minor significant genetic factor of warfarin dose in Han Chinese patients with mechanical heart valve replacement.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Han-Jing Cen, Wu-Tao Zeng, Xiu-Yu Leng, Min Huang, Xiao Chen, Jia-Li Li, Zhi-Ying Huang, Hui-Chang Bi, Xue-Ding Wang, Yan-Ling He, Fan He, Rui-Na Zhou, Qi-Shan Zheng, Li-Zi Zhao
**Journal:** British journal of clinical pharmacology
**Year:** 2010
**PMID:** 20653676

## Abstract

WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ABOUT THIS SUBJECT * Genetic polymorphisms of VKORC1 and CYP2C9 are known to influence warfarin dosage. * Recent studies among Caucasians showed that polymorphisms of CYP4F2 also play a role in warfarin pharmacogenetics. * The contribution of CYP4F2 variants to the variability inwarfarin dose requirement in Chinese subjects remains to be investigated. WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS * This research was to study the effect of CYP4F2 variants on warfarin requirements in the Han Chinese population. * This study developed a multiple regression model including CYP2C9, VKORC1 3673G>A, CYP4F2 genotypes and age, weight, combination use of amiodarone which could explain 56.1% of the individual variability in warfarin dose CYP4F2 could explain 4% of the variance in warfarin dose. * We found that one novel genotypic polymorphism 5417G>T for Asp36Tyr, which was identified as an important marker of warfarin resistance, was absent in the Han Chinese population in our study. AIMS The objective of this study was to assess the effect of the CYP4F2 on the daily stable warfarin dose requirement in Han Chinese patients with mechanical heart valve replacement (MHVR). METHODS From March 2007 to November 2008, 222 Han Chinese MHVR patients were recruited in our study. VKORC1 3673G>A, 5417G>T, CYP2C9*3 and CYP4F2 rs2108622 were genotyped by using the polymerase chain reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism method (PCR-RFLP). Polymorphisms of VKORC1 9041G>A were detected by direct sequencing. Multiple linear regression analysis was used to investigate the contribution of CYP4F2. RESULTS The CYP4F2 rs2108622 CT/TT group took a significantly higher stable warfarin dose (3.2 mg day(-1)) than the CC group (2.9 mg day(-1), 95% CI 0.2, 1.0, P= 0.033). The multiple linear regression model included VKORC1 3673G>A, CYP2C9, CYP4F2 genotypes and clinical characteristics. The model could explain 56.1% of the variance in stable warfarin dose in Han Chinese patients with MHVR. CYP4F2 contributed about 4% to the variance in the warfarin dose. There was no variation in the SNPs of VKORC1 5417G>T. CONCLUSION CYP4F2 is a minor significant factor of individual variability in the stable warfarin dose in Han Chinese patients with MHVR. The effect of CYP2C9 and VKORC1 genotypes on variability in the stable warfarin dose had also been confirmed.
