# Polymorphic variants (CYP2C9*3 and CYP2C9*5) and the F114L active site mutation of CYP2C9: effect on atypical kinetic metabolism profiles.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Timothy S Tracy, J Matthew Hutzler, Robert L Haining, Allan E Rettie, Matthew A Hummel, Leslie J Dickmann
**Journal:** Drug metabolism and disposition: the biological fate of chemicals
**Year:** 2002
**PMID:** 11901091

## Abstract

CYP2C9 wild-type protein has been shown to exhibit atypical kinetic profiles of metabolism that may affect in vitro-in vivo predictions made during the drug development process. Previous work suggests a substrate-dependent effect of polymorphic variants of CYP2C9 on the rate of metabolism; however, it is hypothesized that these active site amino acid changes will affect the kinetic profile of a drug's metabolism as well. To this end, the kinetic profiles of three model CYP2C9 substrates (flurbiprofen, naproxen, and piroxicam) were studied using purified CYP2C9*1 (wild-type) and variants involving active site amino acid changes, including the naturally occurring variants CYP2C9*3 (Leu359) and CYP2C9*5 (Glu360) and the man-made mutant CYP2C9 F114L. CYP2C9*1 (wild-type) metabolized each of the three compounds with a distinctive profile reflective of typical hyperbolic (flurbiprofen), biphasic (naproxen), and substrate inhibition (piroxicam) kinetics. CYP2C9*3 metabolism was again hyperbolic for flurbiprofen, of a linear form for naproxen (no saturation noted), and exhibited substrate inhibition with piroxicam. CYP2C9*5-mediated metabolism was hyperbolic for flurbiprofen and piroxicam but linear with respect to naproxen turnover. The F114L mutant exhibited a hyperbolic kinetic profile for flurbiprofen metabolism, a linear profile for naproxen metabolism, and a substrate inhibition kinetic profile for piroxicam metabolism. In all cases except F114L-mediated piroxicam metabolism, turnover decreased and the K(m) generally increased for each allelic variant compared with wild-type enzyme. It seems that the kinetic profile of CYP2C9-mediated metabolism is dependent on both substrate and the CYP2C9 allelic variant, thus having potential ramifications on drug disposition predictions made during the development process.
