# The prevalence of VKORC1 1639 G>A and CYP2C9*2*3 genotypes in patients that requiring anticoagulant therapy in Turkish population.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Coskun Silan, Omer Tamer Dogan, Fatma Silan, Fatma Mutlu Kukulguven, Halil Fatih Asgun, Semra Ozdemir, Ahmet Uludag, Sinem Atik, Buket Gungor, Seçil Akdur, Hakki Engin Aksulu, Oztürk Ozdemir
**Journal:** Molecular biology reports
**Year:** 2012
**PMID:** 23065265

## Abstract

The aim was to investigate the prevalence of VKORC1 and CYP2C9 genotypes in patients requiring anticoagulant therapy in two different region's populations of Turkey. The recent cohort included 292 patients that needed anticoagulant therapy, and who had a history of deep vein thrombosis and/or pulmonary artery thromboembolism. Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood samples and the StripAssay reverse hybridization or Real Time PCR technique was used for genotype analysis. Genotypes for CYP2C9 were detected as follows: 165 (56.5 %) for CYP2C9*1/*1, 67 (23.0 %) for CYP2C9*1/*2, 25 (8.6 %) for CYP2C9*1/*3, 9 (3.0 %) for CYP2C9*2/*2, 21 (7.2 %) for CYP2C9*2/*3, 5(1.7 %) for CYP2C9*3/*3 for CYP2C9 and the allele frequencies were: 0.723 for allele*1, 0.182 for allele*2 and 0.095 for allele*3 respectively. Genotypes for VKORC1 were detected as follows: 64 (21.9 %) for GG, 220 (75.4 %) for GA and 8 (2.7 %) for AA alleles. The G allele frequency was detected as 0.596, and the A allele frequency was 0.404. The VKORC1 1639 G>A and CYP2C9 mutation prevalence and allele frequency of the current results from two different populations (Sivas and Canakkale) showed similarly very variable profiles when compared to the other results from the Turkish population.
