# The Prevalence of CYP2C8, 2C9, 2J2, and soluble epoxide hydrolase polymorphisms in African Americans with hypertension.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Albert W Dreisbach, Shanker Japa, Aster Sigel, Melissa B Parenti, Arthur E Hess, Sengkeo L Srinouanprachanh, Allan E Rettie, Helen Kim, Federico M Farin, L Lee Hamm, Juan J L Lertora
**Journal:** American journal of hypertension
**Year:** 2005
**PMID:** 16202848

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** The cytochrome P450 (CYP) epoxygenase pathway produces arachidonic acid metabolites that are vasoactive, that affect renal sodium handling, and that have been proposed to play a mechanistic role in hypertension. Multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in CYP2C8, 2C9, 2J2 and soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH) have been identified, many of which have altered functional activity in vitro. We performed a case-control study to determine the prevalence of epoxygenase-related SNP in African American individuals and to evaluate whether these SNP are associated with increased risk of hypertension.

**METHODS:** Normotensive African American individuals (N = 107) and African American patients with hypertension (N = 108) were recruited. DNA was extracted from a venous blood sample and genotyped for CYP2C8*2,*3, CYP2C9*2-*5,*8,*11, CYP2J2 *2-*7, L50L, R49S, V113M, N124S, sEH R287Q, and sEH 403Rins variant alleles by allelic discrimination using real-time polymerase chain reaction. Genotype and allele frequencies were calculated and associations with hypertension were estimated using unconditional logistic regression, adjusting for age and sex.

**RESULTS:** No association was found between any of the variant alleles and hypertension. We did find that only the CYP2C8*3and CYP2C9*2 alleles were in strong linkage disequilibrium in both the hypertensive and healthy African American groups, a finding that was reported previously in healthy individuals of white ethnicity.

**CONCLUSIONS:** These results suggest that these epoxygenase-related SNP are not associated with increased risk of hypertension in the African American population. There was significant linkage disequilibrium between CYP2C8*3 and CYP2C9*2 alleles that was not associated with hypertension.
