# Genetic polymorphism of CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 in a Bolivian population: an investigative and comparative study.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Heydy V Bravo-Villalta, Koujirou Yamamoto, Katsunori Nakamura, Ana Bayá, Yuko Okada, Ryuya Horiuchi
**Journal:** European journal of clinical pharmacology
**Year:** 2005
**PMID:** 15776277

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVE:** Several reports of CYP2C genetic polymorphism demonstrate its potential clinical role in determining both inter-individual and inter-ethnic differences in drug efficacy. We estimated the distribution of CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 common variants in the Bolivian population (a South American population), and compared these data with those from Asian, African, Caucasian and Oceanian populations.

**METHODS:** Genomic DNA was obtained from 778 unrelated healthy volunteers from Bolivia. The genotypic status of CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 was determined by means of polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism.

**RESULTS:** Allelic and genotypic frequencies of CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 were determined for the Bolivian population, and comparison of the data with other ethnic groups revealed a lower CYP2C9*2 frequency (4.8%) than in Caucasians, but a higher frequency than in Asians; frequencies of CYP2C9*3 (3.0%) and CYP2C9 (0.4%) poor metabolizers (PMs) were similar to those seen in Asian populations. Frequencies of CYP2C19*2 (7.8%), CYP2C19*3 (0.1%), and CYP2C19 PMs (1.0%) in the Bolivian population were for the most part lower than in Caucasian, Asian, Oceanian and African populations.

**CONCLUSION:** This is the first study to investigate a South American population for genetic polymorphism in the CYP2C subfamily. The Bolivian population differs from most other ethnic groups in the incidence of CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 common variants that might be influenced by its admixture characteristics.
