# Impact of ATM and SLC22A1 Polymorphisms on Therapeutic Response to Metformin in Iranian Diabetic Patients

## Metadata
**Authors:** Fazlollah Shokri, Hamid Ghaedi, Soudeh Ghafouri Fard, Abolfazl Movafagh, Saeid Abediankenari, Abdolkarim Mahrooz, Zahra Kashi, Mir Davood Omrani
**Journal:** International Journal of Molecular and Cellular Medicine
**Date:** 2016 Winter
**PMID:** 27386433
**PMCID:** PMC4916778
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4916778/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4916778/pdf/ijmcm-5-001.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4916778/pdf/ijmcm-5-001.pdf)

## Abstract

Metabolic syndrome and its pathological sequel, type 2 diabetes are considered as important global health problems. Metformin is the most common drug prescribed for patients with this disorder. Consequently, understanding the genetic pathways involved in pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of this drug can have a considerable effect on the personalized treatment of type 2 diabetes. In this study, we evaluated the association between rs11212617 polymorphism of ATM gene and rs628031 of SLC22A1 gene with response to treatment in newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes patients. We genotyped rs11212617 and rs628031 polymorphism by PCR based restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) and assessed the role of this polymorphisms on response to treatment in 140 patients who have been recently diagnosed with type 2 diabetes and were under monotherapy with metformin for 6 months. Response to metformin was defined by HbA1c and fasting blood sugar (FBS) values. Based on such evaluations, patients were divided into two groups: responders (n= 63) and non-responders (n= 77). No significant association was found between these polymorphisms and response to treatment (OR= 0.86, [95% CI 0.52–1.41], P= 0.32) for rs11212617 and (OR= 0.45, [95% CI 0.64–1.76], P= 0.45) for rs 628031. The reported gene variants in ATM and SLC22A1 are not significantly associated with metformin treatment response in type 2 diabetic patients in an Iranian population.

Key Words: Metformin, type 2 diabetes, pharmacogenetic

## Materials and methods

**Patients**

This study included 140 patients (121 women and 19 men)with newly diagnosed T2D according to WHO ([20](#B20)). The mean age of the patients was 53.06 (±18) years. Clinical characteristics of patients, including weight, height, blood pressure, and BMI, are presented in [Table 1](#T1). All patients received metformin (1000mg/day) for a 6 month period. None of the patients were receiving insulin therapy or oral anti-diabetic (ODA) medication prior to their diabetes diagnosis. Exclusion criteria for the study were type 1 diabetes, chronic hepatic disease, renal failure, autoimmune diseases, malignant diseases, and pregnancy. The protocol study was performed in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional ethics committee and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2008. Informed consent was obtained from all participants before enrollment. All patients underwent a physical examination, and information about medical history, demographic parameters, and medication use was obtained using a questionnaire. Most patients had a family history of diabetes, and taking antihypertensive medication such as losartan, an ACE inhibitor, or a beta blocker, and most patients were receiving lipid-lowering therapy.

### Table 1.

| After 25 Weeks |  |  | Baseline |  |  |   |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| P-value | Responders | Non-Responders | P-value | Responders | Non-Responders | parameter |
| 0.51 | 53.68± 9.68 | 52.96±10.34 | 0.51 | 53.68± 9.68 | 52.96±10.34 | Age |
| 0.04 | 122.38±22.46 | 127.82±18.34 | 0.13 | 129.49±16.12 | 135.02±15.03 | SBP (mmHg) |
| 0.03 | 76.44±10.34 | 79.65±10.16 | 0.20 | 79.32±10.27 | 90.96±79.67 | DBP (mmHg) |
| 0.54 | 74.90±14.02 | 78.37±15.81 | 0.73 | 76.23±13.88 | 79.28±15.85 | Weight |
| 0.39 | 1.57±0.07 | 1.58±0.08 | 0.39 | 1.57±0.07 | 1.58±0.08 | Height |
| 0.88 | 30.43±5.70 | 31.12±5.49 | 0.84 | 30.94±5.62 | 31.49±5.58 | BMI |
| 0.00 | 118.91±19.33 | 143.22±40.33 | 0.68 | 146.72±28.54 | 142.10±22.77 | FBS (mg/dL) |
| 0.00 | 6.29±0.70 | 7.64±1.15 | 0.03 | 7.96±0.80 | 7.54±0.81 | HbA1C (%) |
| 0.36 | 152.55±55.39 | 174.34±88.84 | 0.29 | 185.38±82.64 | 171.60±81.14 | TG1 (mg/dL) |
| 0.75 | 167.64±33.75 | 176.70±35.29 | 0.58 | 185.86±38.99 | 182.55±43.70 | TC (mg/dL) |
| 0.77 | 49.83±16.28 | 48.14±13.02 | 0.11 | 46.03±15.00 | 48.83±15.03 | HDL (mg/dL) |
| 0.98 | 86.64±26.93 | 90.74±23.39 | 0.60 | 101±34.36 | 99.39±34.73 | LDL (mg/dL) |

Table 1 Caption: Values of the study parameters at baseline and after metformin therapy based on responder and non- responder status

Based on the response to metformin, patients were classified into two groups: responder group (who showed a decrease in HbA1c levels by at least1% from the baseline) and non- responder group.

**Laboratory analyses**

The HbA1c levels were assayed by boronate affinity technique (Axis Shield PoC AS, Oslo, Norway; accuracy, failure<5 %). Standard enzym-atic tests were used to assay values of fasting blood sugar (FBS), triglycerides (TGs), total cholesterol (TC), HDL-C, ALT, and AST after an overnight fast. The LDL-C values were calculated according to the Friedewald method ([21](#B21)).

**Genotype determination**

Genomic DNA was extracted from samples containing EDTA. PCR-based restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) was used to genotype the mentioned variant. In brief, DNA was amplified in 25 µL of reaction mixture consisted of 1 unit of Taq DNA polymerase, 400- 500 ng genomic DNA, 200 mM of each dNTP, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 280 nM of each primer. The designed primers used for *SLC22A1*- rs628031 polymorphism were F5'- CTAAACCCAGTGATTCATGCTCTTT- 3' and R5^'_^ TTTGTTCTCATTCCAGAGGCTTATC -3^'^, and for *ATM*- *rs11212617 *polymorphism were F5’^_ ^TGGGTTGCTTGTGGATAACATATAGTTGG- 3^'^and R5^'^- GAGAAGGCAGTAAAGTGAAGG-AATACAGAG- 3^'^.

PCR for *SLC22A1*- rs628031 polymorphism was accomplished at 95 °C for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles of 95 °C for 30 s, 64 °C for 35 s, and 72 °C for 60 s, with a final extension step of 72 °C for 5 min. Amplification products from each sample (422 bp) were cleaved by MscI (Fermentas, Lithuania) after 15 h incubation at 37 °C and resulted in 154 and 268- bp fragments, which were subjected to electrophoresis on a 2% agarose gel.

PCR for *ATM*- rs11212617 polymorphism was accomplished at 95 °C for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles of 95 °C for 30 s, 64.5 °C for 35 s, and 72 °C for 60 s, with a final extension step of 72 °C for 5 min. Amplification products from each sample (209 bp) were cleaved by TaaI (HpyCH4III) (Fermentas, Lithuania) after 15 h incubation at 65 °C and resulted in 153 and 56- bp fragments, which were subjected to electrophoresis on a 2 % agarose gel.

**Statistical analyses**

All statistical analyses were performed by statistical software package for social sciences (SPSS 18.0, Chicago). The clinical and laboratory data were expressed as mean± SD or percentages. To determine variable distributions, we used Kolmogorov Simonov normality test. Mann–Whitney U test was used to analyze differences of non- parametric variables. The association between categorical variables, such as genotype groups and metformin response was determined with chi- square test. The odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated as a measure of the association of *SLC22A1*-rs628031and *ATM*- rs11212617 variants with metformin response. The chi-square goodness-of-fit test with one degree of freedom was used for testing Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium. P values ≤ 0.05 were considered to be statistically significant.

## Results

In this monotherapy study, the subjects were split into two groups: responders (n= 63) and non-responders (n =77). The groups did not differ significantly in age (53.68± 9.68 years in the responder group, 52.96± 10.34 years in the non-responder group, P= 0.51). Of the 140 participants, 121 were women (55 were responders and 66 were non- responders) and 19 were men (8 were responders and 11 were non- responders). Values of the study parameters at baseline and after metformin therapy based on responder and non- responder status are presented in [Table 1](#T1).

As shown in [Table 1](#T1), there was a statistically significant difference between responders and non-responders after metformin therapy with respect to systolic blood pressure (SBP) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP). The allele frequencies and genotypes distribution of *ATM*- rs11212617 and *SLC22A1*- rs628031 polymorphisms are shown in [Table 2](#T2) and [3](#T3), respectively.

### Table 2.

|   | Responder n (%) | Non-Responder n (%) | OR (95% CI) | P |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Genotype |   |   |   |   |
| TT | 23 (36.50) | 36 (46.75) | 0.65a (0.33-1.29) | 0.14 |
| TG | 34 (53.97) | 31 (40.26) | 1.74b (0.88-3.41) | 0.07 |
| GG | 6 (9.53) | 10 (12.91) | 0.61c (0.20-1.85) | 0.27 |
| Allele |   |   |   |   |
| T | 80 (63.49) | 103 (66.88) |   |   |
| G | 46 (36.51) | 51 (33.12) | 0.86d (0.52-1.41) | 0.32 |

Table 2 Caption: Genotypes and alleles frequencies of ATM- rs11212617

### Table 3.

|   | Responder n (%) | Non- Responder n (%) | OR (95% CI) | P |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Genotype |   |   |   |   |
| AA | 29 (46.03) | 37 (48.05) | 0.92a (0.47-1.79) | 0.47 |
| AG | 28 (44.44) | 29 (37.66) | 1.32b (0.67- 2.60) | 0.26 |
| GG | 6 (9.52) | 11 (14.28) | 0.63c (0.22-1.81) | 0.27 |
| Allele |   |   |   |   |
| A | 86 (68.25) | 103 (66.88) |   |   |
| G | 40 (31.75) | 51 (33.12) | 1.06d (0.64-1.76) | 0.45 |

Table 3 Caption: Genotypes and alleles frequencies of SLC22A1- rs628031

## Discussion

In this study, we have defined the response to metformin in 140 patients with T2D. Contrary to our hypothesis, no association was found between variants in *SLC22A1* and *ATM* genes, and glycemic response to metformin.

There is a huge clinical variation in response to metformin, and this drug is usually combined with other agents such as sulfonylureas to treat diabetes. Clinical trials data have indicated that more than one third of patients receiving metformin monotherapy do not achieve acceptable control of fasting glucose levels ([22](#B22)). The main reason for the lack of a dramatic response in the treatment of these patients may be a variation of genes involved in pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the drug ([2](#B2), [23](#B23), [24](#B24)).

It has been demonstrated that the OCTs and ATM proteins play a dominant role in glycemic response to metformin ([14](#B14), [15](#B15), [18](#B18)).

HbA1c level has been assessed as a marker of treatment response in diabetic patients in many studies. In some of them, treatment success has been defined as the ability to reach the treatment target of an HbA1c≤ 7 % ([8](#B8), [18](#B18), [19](#B19)). However, Shikata et al. selected reduction of HbA1c values by more than 0.5 % as a cut off point for dividing patients into responders and non- responders ([17](#B17)). As reported in a systematic review, over a 3-month period of metformin therapy, HbA1c values decreased by approximately 1% compared with placebo. Data of previous studies of OAD drugs indicate that they reduce HbA1c levels by 0.5–1.5% ([1](#B1)). Thus, in the present study, a reduction of 1≤ % in HbA1c after 25 weeks was deemed a response to metformin therapy.

In our study, the effect of metformin in the treatment of diabetes or improvement of relevant glycemic traits was not magnified among the carriers of the C allele at rs11212617 in the *ATM* gene. Our finding concurred with a previous report which showed no association between this polymorphism and insulin sensitivity, fasting glucose, HbA1c, or disposition index diabetes prevention program (DPP) ([8](#B8)). However, this finding does not support the previously reported association of this allele with improved metformin action on glycemic control ([18](#B18)). A previous study conducted in T2D patients in the Netherlands and the UK has identified rs11212617 as the first robustly replicated common susceptibility locus associated with metformin treatment response ([19](#B19)). However, the function of this gene variant is not elucidated so far ([25](#B25)).

Although OCT1 encoded by *SLC22A1* gene has been shown to play a significant role in the efficacy of metformin, the association of rs628031 variant with glycemic response has not been assessed before. So, our study is the first study in this regard which shows no significant association between rs628031 alleles and metformin response. In the present study, the frequency of the mutant allele of *SLC22A1*-rs628031(M408V) variant between responders and non-responders was not significantly different. The M408V variant has been associated with gastrointestinal side effects in 246 metformin users. A significant lower average HbA1c level in the presence of a lower average dose of metformin in those cases implies a possible relationship between better response to metformin and susceptibility to side effects ([26](#B26)). The local increase of drug concentration in the intestinal tissue is proposed as a mechanism of metformin intolerance. As *SLC22A1* and *SLC22A3* are also expressed in enterocytes, it has been suggested that genetic variants in these genes may also affect the intestinal metformin uptake and consequently induce gastrointestinal side effects ([14](#B14)).

Previous studies showed that OAD drugs effectively decrease HbA1c levels by 0.5–1.5 % ([1](#B1)). This result demonstrates that the greater proportion of the decrease in HbA1c levels in all patients after metformin therapy was associated with responders, suggesting that metformin response can be important in evaluating HbA1c as a key indicator in monitoring the long- term glycemic control.

The limitation of our present study was that we did not assay plasma metformin concentrations to examine the link between the metformin levels and the allelic and genotypic distribution of the studied variant.

Inconsistent results in the mentioned studies could be due to multiple reasons including the different definitions of metformin responses in different studies, the different efficacies for metformin at different HbA1c baselines, and more importantly variations in different populations.

In summary, future large- scale studies are needed for the identification of novel loci affecting treatment response especially considering the fact that the biology of metformin working mechanism

is not fully understood.

In addition, a more complete investigation of *SLC22A1* variants may identify novel polymorphisms which can affect the metformin response. Additional investigations would identify the ethnic variability in the* SLC22A1* and *ATM* genes and the inter- individual differences in response to metformin.

## Conflict of interests

The uthors declared no conflict of interests.

## References

1. Sherifali D, Nerenberg K, Pullenayegum E, et al. The effect of oral antidiabetic agents on A1C levels: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes care. 2010;33:1859–64. doi: 10.2337/dc09-1727.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/dc09-1727) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2909079/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20484130/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes%20care&title=The%20effect%20of%20oral%20antidiabetic%20agents%20on%20A1C%20levels:%20a%20systematic%20review%20and%20meta-analysis&author=D%20Sherifali&author=K%20Nerenberg&author=E%20Pullenayegum&volume=33&publication_year=2010&pages=1859-64&pmid=20484130&doi=10.2337/dc09-1727&)

2. Zhou K, Donnelly LA, Kimber CH, et al. Reduced-function SLC22A1 polymorphisms encoding organic cation transporter 1 and glycemic response to metformin: a GoDARTS study. Diabetes. 2009;58:1434–9. doi: 10.2337/db08-0896.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/db08-0896) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2682689/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19336679/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes&title=Reduced-function%20SLC22A1%20polymorphisms%20encoding%20organic%20cation%20transporter%201%20and%20glycemic%20response%20to%20metformin:%20a%20GoDARTS%20study&author=K%20Zhou&author=LA%20Donnelly&author=CH%20Kimber&volume=58&publication_year=2009&pages=1434-9&pmid=19336679&doi=10.2337/db08-0896&)

3. Chan JC, Deerochanawong C, Shera AS, et al. Role of metformin in the initiation of pharmacotherapy for type 2 diabetes: an Asian-Pacific perspective. Diabetes research and clinical practice. 2007;75:255–66. doi: 10.1016/j.diabres.2006.06.023.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diabres.2006.06.023) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16876285/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes%20research%20and%20clinical%20practice&title=Role%20of%20metformin%20in%20the%20initiation%20of%20pharmacotherapy%20for%20type%202%20diabetes:%20an%20Asian-Pacific%20perspective&author=JC%20Chan&author=C%20Deerochanawong&author=AS%20Shera&volume=75&publication_year=2007&pages=255-66&pmid=16876285&doi=10.1016/j.diabres.2006.06.023&)

4. Mahrooz A, Parsanasab H, Hashemi-Soteh MB, et al. The role of clinical response to metformin in patients newly diagnosed with type 2 diabetes: a monotherapy study. Clinical and experimental medicine. 2015;15:159–65. doi: 10.1007/s10238-014-0283-8.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10238-014-0283-8) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24740684/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clinical%20and%20experimental%20medicine&title=The%20role%20of%20clinical%20response%20to%20metformin%20in%20patients%20newly%20diagnosed%20with%20type%202%20diabetes:%20a%20monotherapy%20study&author=A%20Mahrooz&author=H%20Parsanasab&author=MB%20Hashemi-Soteh&volume=15&publication_year=2015&pages=159-65&pmid=24740684&doi=10.1007/s10238-014-0283-8&)

5. Valizadeh M, Alavi N, Mazloomzadeh S, et al. The risk factors and incidence of type 2 diabetes mellitus and metabolic syndrome in women with previous gestational diabetes. International journal of endocrinology and metabolism. 2015;13:e21696. doi: 10.5812/ijem.21696.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.5812/ijem.21696) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4386229/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25892996/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=International%20journal%20of%20endocrinology%20and%20metabolism&title=The%20risk%20factors%20and%20incidence%20of%20type%202%20diabetes%20mellitus%20and%20metabolic%20syndrome%20in%20women%20with%20previous%20gestational%20diabetes&author=M%20Valizadeh&author=N%20Alavi&author=S%20Mazloomzadeh&volume=13&publication_year=2015&pages=e21696&pmid=25892996&doi=10.5812/ijem.21696&)

6. Aljada A, Mousa SA. Metformin and neoplasia: implications and indications. Pharmacology & therapeutics. 2012;133:108–15. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2011.09.004.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2011.09.004) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21924289/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacology%20&%20therapeutics&title=Metformin%20and%20neoplasia:%20implications%20and%20indications&author=A%20Aljada&author=SA%20Mousa&volume=133&publication_year=2012&pages=108-15&pmid=21924289&doi=10.1016/j.pharmthera.2011.09.004&)

7. Emami Riedmaier A, Fisel P, Nies AT, et al. Metformin and cancer: from the old medicine cabinet to pharmacological pitfalls and prospects. Trends in pharmacological sciences. 2013;34:126–35. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2012.11.005.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2012.11.005) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23277337/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Trends%20in%20pharmacological%20sciences&title=Metformin%20and%20cancer:%20from%20the%20old%20medicine%20cabinet%20to%20pharmacological%20pitfalls%20and%20prospects&author=Riedmaier%20A%20Emami&author=P%20Fisel&author=AT%20Nies&volume=34&publication_year=2013&pages=126-35&pmid=23277337&doi=10.1016/j.tips.2012.11.005&)

8. Florez JC, Jablonski KA, Taylor A, et al. The C allele of ATM rs11212617 does not associate with metformin response in the Diabetes Prevention Program. Diabetes care. 2012;35:1864–7. doi: 10.2337/dc11-2301.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2337/dc11-2301) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3425006/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22751958/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes%20care&title=The%20C%20allele%20of%20ATM%20rs11212617%20does%20not%20associate%20with%20metformin%20response%20in%20the%20Diabetes%20Prevention%20Program&author=JC%20Florez&author=KA%20Jablonski&author=A%20Taylor&volume=35&publication_year=2012&pages=1864-7&pmid=22751958&doi=10.2337/dc11-2301&)

9. Nasri H, Baradaran A, Ardalan MR, et al. Bright renoprotective properties of metformin: beyond blood glucose regulatory effects. Iranian journal of kidney diseases. 2013;7:423–8.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24241085/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Iranian%20journal%20of%20kidney%20diseases&title=Bright%20renoprotective%20properties%20of%20metformin:%20beyond%20blood%20glucose%20regulatory%20effects&author=H%20Nasri&author=A%20Baradaran&author=MR%20Ardalan&volume=7&publication_year=2013&pages=423-8&pmid=24241085&)

10. Ota S, Horigome K, Ishii T, et al. Metformin suppresses glucose-6-phosphatase expression by a complex I inhibition and AMPK activation-independent mechanism. Biochemical and biophysical research communications. 2009;388:311–6. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.07.164.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.07.164) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19664596/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biochemical%20and%20biophysical%20research%20communications&title=Metformin%20suppresses%20glucose-6-phosphatase%20expression%20by%20a%20complex%20I%20inhibition%20and%20AMPK%20activation-independent%20mechanism&author=S%20Ota&author=K%20Horigome&author=T%20Ishii&volume=388&publication_year=2009&pages=311-6&pmid=19664596&doi=10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.07.164&)

11. Salpeter SR, Buckley NS, Kahn JA, et al. Meta-analysis: metformin treatment in persons at risk for diabetes mellitus. The American journal of medicine. 2008;121:149–57 e2. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2007.09.016.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjmed.2007.09.016) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18261504/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=The%20American%20journal%20of%20medicine&title=Meta-analysis:%20metformin%20treatment%20in%20persons%20at%20risk%20for%20diabetes%20mellitus&author=SR%20Salpeter&author=NS%20Buckley&author=JA%20Kahn&volume=121&publication_year=2008&pages=149-57%20e2&pmid=18261504&doi=10.1016/j.amjmed.2007.09.016&)

12. Nasri H, Rafieian-Kopaei M. Metformin and diabetic kidney disease: a mini-review on recent findings. Iranian journal of pediatrics. 2014;24:565–8.  [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4359408/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25793062/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Iranian%20journal%20of%20pediatrics&title=Metformin%20and%20diabetic%20kidney%20disease:%20a%20mini-review%20on%20recent%20findings&author=H%20Nasri&author=M%20Rafieian-Kopaei&volume=24&publication_year=2014&pages=565-8&pmid=25793062&)

13. Kerb R. Implications of genetic polymorphisms in drug transporters for pharmacotherapy. Cancer letters. 2006;234:4–33. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2005.06.051.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2005.06.051) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16504381/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20letters&title=Implications%20of%20genetic%20polymorphisms%20in%20drug%20transporters%20for%20pharmacotherapy&author=R%20Kerb&volume=234&publication_year=2006&pages=4-33&pmid=16504381&doi=10.1016/j.canlet.2005.06.051&)

14. Semiz S, Dujic T, Causevic A. Pharmacogenetics and personalized treatment of type 2 diabetes. Biochemia medica. 2013;23:154–71. doi: 10.11613/BM.2013.020.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.11613/BM.2013.020) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3900064/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23894862/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biochemia%20medica&title=Pharmacogenetics%20and%20personalized%20treatment%20of%20type%202%20diabetes&author=S%20Semiz&author=T%20Dujic&author=A%20Causevic&volume=23&publication_year=2013&pages=154-71&pmid=23894862&doi=10.11613/BM.2013.020&)

15. Viollet B, Guigas B, Sanz Garcia N, et al. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of metformin: an overview. Clinical science. 2012;122:253–70. doi: 10.1042/CS20110386.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1042/CS20110386) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3398862/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22117616/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clinical%20science&title=Cellular%20and%20molecular%20mechanisms%20of%20metformin:%20an%20overview&author=B%20Viollet&author=B%20Guigas&author=Garcia%20N%20Sanz&volume=122&publication_year=2012&pages=253-70&pmid=22117616&doi=10.1042/CS20110386&)

16. Kimura N, Masuda S, Tanihara Y, et al. Metformin is a superior substrate for renal organic cation transporter OCT2 rather than hepatic OCT1. Drug metabolism and pharmacokinetics. 2005;20:379–86. doi: 10.2133/dmpk.20.379.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2133/dmpk.20.379) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16272756/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Drug%20metabolism%20and%20pharmacokinetics&title=Metformin%20is%20a%20superior%20substrate%20for%20renal%20organic%20cation%20transporter%20OCT2%20rather%20than%20hepatic%20OCT1&author=N%20Kimura&author=S%20Masuda&author=Y%20Tanihara&volume=20&publication_year=2005&pages=379-86&pmid=16272756&doi=10.2133/dmpk.20.379&)

17. Shikata E, Yamamoto R, Takane H, et al. Human organic cation transporter (OCT1 and OCT2) gene polymorphisms and therapeutic effects of metformin. Journal of human genetics. 2007;52:117–22. doi: 10.1007/s10038-006-0087-0.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10038-006-0087-0) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17111267/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Journal%20of%20human%20genetics&title=Human%20organic%20cation%20transporter%20(OCT1%20and%20OCT2)%20gene%20polymorphisms%20and%20therapeutic%20effects%20of%20metformin&author=E%20Shikata&author=R%20Yamamoto&author=H%20Takane&volume=52&publication_year=2007&pages=117-22&pmid=17111267&doi=10.1007/s10038-006-0087-0&)

18. GoDarts , Group UDPS, Wellcome Trust Case Control C, et al. Common variants near ATM are associated with glycemic response to metformin in type 2 diabetes. Nature genetics. 2011;43:117–20. doi: 10.1038/ng.735.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.735) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3030919/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21186350/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature%20genetics&title=Common%20variants%20near%20ATM%20are%20associated%20with%20glycemic%20response%20to%20metformin%20in%20type%202%20diabetes&author=%20GoDarts&author=UDPS%20Group&author=Trust%20Case%20Control%20C%20Wellcome&volume=43&publication_year=2011&pages=117-20&pmid=21186350&doi=10.1038/ng.735&)

19. van Leeuwen N, Nijpels G, Becker ML, et al. A gene variant near ATM is significantly associated with metformin treatment response in type 2 diabetes: a replication and meta-analysis of five cohorts. Diabetologia. 2012;55:1971–7. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2537-x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-012-2537-x) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3369131/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22453232/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetologia&title=A%20gene%20variant%20near%20ATM%20is%20significantly%20associated%20with%20metformin%20treatment%20response%20in%20type%202%20diabetes:%20a%20replication%20and%20meta-analysis%20of%20five%20cohorts&author=Leeuwen%20N%20van&author=G%20Nijpels&author=ML%20Becker&volume=55&publication_year=2012&pages=1971-7&pmid=22453232&doi=10.1007/s00125-012-2537-x&)

20. Bennett PH. Impact of the new WHO classification and diagnostic criteria. Diabetes, obesity & metabolism. 1999;1 Suppl 2:S1–6. doi: 10.1046/j.1463-1326.1999.0010s2001.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1463-1326.1999.0010s2001.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11221797/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Diabetes,%20obesity%20&%20metabolism&title=Impact%20of%20the%20new%20WHO%20classification%20and%20diagnostic%20criteria&author=PH%20Bennett&volume=1%20Suppl%202&publication_year=1999&pages=S1-6&pmid=11221797&doi=10.1046/j.1463-1326.1999.0010s2001.x&)

21. Friedewald WT, Levy RI, Fredrickson DS. Estimation of the concentration of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol in plasma, without use of the preparative ultracentrifuge. Clinical chemistry. 1972;18:499–502.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/4337382/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clinical%20chemistry&title=Estimation%20of%20the%20concentration%20of%20low-density%20lipoprotein%20cholesterol%20in%20plasma,%20without%20use%20of%20the%20preparative%20ultracentrifuge&author=WT%20Friedewald&author=RI%20Levy&author=DS%20Fredrickson&volume=18&publication_year=1972&pages=499-502&pmid=4337382&)

22. Shu Y, Sheardown SA, Brown C, et al. Effect of genetic variation in the organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1) on metformin action. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2007;117:1422–31. doi: 10.1172/JCI30558.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI30558) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC1857259/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17476361/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=The%20Journal%20of%20clinical%20investigation&title=Effect%20of%20genetic%20variation%20in%20the%20organic%20cation%20transporter%201%20(OCT1)%20on%20metformin%20action&author=Y%20Shu&author=SA%20Sheardown&author=C%20Brown&volume=117&publication_year=2007&pages=1422-31&pmid=17476361&doi=10.1172/JCI30558&)

23. Lozano E, Herraez E, Briz O, et al. Role of the plasma membrane transporter of organic cations OCT1 and its genetic variants in modern liver pharmacology. BioMed research international. 2013;2013:692071. doi: 10.1155/2013/692071.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/692071) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3747481/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23984399/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BioMed%20research%20international&title=Role%20of%20the%20plasma%20membrane%20transporter%20of%20organic%20cations%20OCT1%20and%20its%20genetic%20variants%20in%20modern%20liver%20pharmacology&author=E%20Lozano&author=E%20Herraez&author=O%20Briz&volume=2013&publication_year=2013&pages=692071&pmid=23984399&doi=10.1155/2013/692071&)

24. Sissung TM, Troutman SM, Campbell TJ, et al. Transporter pharmacogenetics: transporter polymorphisms affect normal physiology, diseases, and pharmacotherapy. Discovery medicine. 2012;13:19–34.  [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4006110/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22284781/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Discovery%20medicine&title=Transporter%20pharmacogenetics:%20transporter%20polymorphisms%20affect%20normal%20physiology,%20diseases,%20and%20pharmacotherapy&author=TM%20Sissung&author=SM%20Troutman&author=TJ%20Campbell&volume=13&publication_year=2012&pages=19-34&pmid=22284781&)

25. Becker ML, Pearson ER, Tkac I. Pharmacogenetics of oral antidiabetic drugs. International journal of endocrinology. 2013;2013:686315. doi: 10.1155/2013/686315.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/686315) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3845331/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24324494/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=International%20journal%20of%20endocrinology&title=Pharmacogenetics%20of%20oral%20antidiabetic%20drugs&author=ML%20Becker&author=ER%20Pearson&author=I%20Tkac&volume=2013&publication_year=2013&pages=686315&pmid=24324494&doi=10.1155/2013/686315&)

26. Tarasova L, Kalnina I, Geldnere K, et al. Association of genetic variation in the organic cation transporters OCT1, OCT2 and multidrug and toxin extrusion 1 transporter protein genes with the gastrointestinal side effects and lower BMI in metformin-treated type 2 diabetes patients. Pharmacogenetics and genomics. 2012;22:659–66. doi: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e3283561666.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0b013e3283561666) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22735389/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenetics%20and%20genomics&title=Association%20of%20genetic%20variation%20in%20the%20organic%20cation%20transporters%20OCT1,%20OCT2%20and%20multidrug%20and%20toxin%20extrusion%201%20transporter%20protein%20genes%20with%20the%20gastrointestinal%20side%20effects%20and%20lower%20BMI%20in%20metformin-treated%20type%202%20diabetes%20patients&author=L%20Tarasova&author=I%20Kalnina&author=K%20Geldnere&volume=22&publication_year=2012&pages=659-66&pmid=22735389&doi=10.1097/FPC.0b013e3283561666&)
