# A high incidence of polymorphic CYP2C19 variants in archival blood samples from Papua New Guinea.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Huai-Ling Hsu, Kathryn J Woad, D Graeme Woodfield, Nuala A Helsby
**Journal:** Human genomics
**Year:** 2008
**PMID:** 19129087

## Abstract

There is considerable inter-ethnic variability in the incidence of CYP2C19 genetic poor metabolisers ( var / var ). About 3 per cent of Caucasians are CYP2C19 var/var . By contrast, an extremely high incidence (70 per cent) is observed in the Melanesian island of Vanuatu. The colonisation of the Pacific Islands is believed to have involved migration through Papua New Guinea (PNG), and hence a high incidence may also be expected in this population. The reported incidence in PNG was only 36 per cent, however. PNG is a country of extensive ethnic diversity, and the incidence of the CYP2C19 var/var in other regional populations of PNG is currently not established. In this study, restriction fragment length polymorphism-polymerase chain reaction analysis of archival blood serum samples was used to determine the prevalence of the CYP2C19*2 and *3 variant alleles in three different ethnic and geographically isolated populations of PNG. In the largest population studied (Iruna), the frequency of both variant CYP2C19 alleles was high (0.37 and 0.34, respectively). Specifically, the frequency of the CYP2C19*3 allele was significantly higher than in the PNG (East Sepik) population reported previously (0.34 vs 0.16; p < 0.0001). In the Iruna population, 48.9 per cent of the samples were homozygous variants for CYP2C19*2 or *3 , which although higher was not statistically different from the East Sepik population (36 per cent). The results of this study indicated that other regional populations of PNG also have a relatively high incidence of the CYP2C19 genetic polymorphism compared with Caucasian populations. The high incidence reported in Vanuatu, however, may be due to genetic drift rather than a PNG founder population, as the Vanuatu population is dominated by the CYP2C19*2 allele, with a lower contribution from the *3 allelic variant.
