# Genetic factors associated with drug-resistance of epilepsy: relevance of stratification by patient age and aetiology of epilepsy.

## Metadata
**Authors:** M Blanca Sánchez, José L Herranz, Carlos Leno, Rosa Arteaga, Agustín Oterino, Elsa M Valdizán, José M Nicolás, Javier Adín, Juan A Armijo
**Journal:** Seizure
**Year:** 2010
**PMID:** 20064729

## Abstract

Epilepsy drug-resistance may depend on the metabolism of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), transport to the epileptic focus and/or target sensitivity. Furthermore, drug response depends on multiple characteristics of the patient, the epilepsy, and the antiepileptic drugs used. We have investigated the association between polymorphisms related to antiepileptic drug metabolism (CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and UGT), transport (ABCB1), and targets (SCN1A) both in a crude analysis and after adjusting by clinical factors associated with drug-resistance, and stratifying by patient age or aetiology of epilepsy. Caucasian outpatients (N=289), children (N=80) and adolescent-adults (N=209), with idiopathic (N=69), cryptogenic (N=97) or symptomatic epilepsies (N=123) were selected when they had either drug-resistance (with at least four seizures over the previous year after treatment with more than three appropriate AEDs at appropriate doses) or drug responsiveness (without seizures for at least a year). Samples were genotyped by allelic discrimination using TaqMan probes. No significant association between polymorphisms and drug-resistance was found either in the crude analysis or in the adjusted analysis. However, adults with the ABCB1_3435TT or 2677TT genotypes had a lower risk of drug-resistance than those with the CC or the GG genotypes. Furthermore, patients with symptomatic epilepsies with the ABCB1_3435CT or TT genotypes had a lower risk of drug-resistance than those with the CC genotype. An opposite but insignificant tendency was found in children and in idiopathic epilepsies. Although replication studies will be needed to confirm our results, they suggest that stratification by patient age and by the aetiology of epilepsy could contribute to unmask the association between ABCB1 polymorphisms and drug-resistance of epilepsy.
