# Are changes in olanzapine-induced liver enzyme levels associated with GSTT1, GSTM1, GSTP1, and OGG1 gene polymorphisms?

## Metadata
**Authors:** Aylin Elkama, Nazlıcan İlik, Mehmet Ak, Bensu Karahalil
**Journal:** Archives of Industrial Hygiene and Toxicology
**Date:** 2024 Mar 29
**DOI:** [10.2478/aiht-2024-75-3770](https://doi.org/10.2478/aiht-2024-75-3770)
**PMID:** 38548381
**PMCID:** PMC10978158
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10978158/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10978158/pdf/aiht-75-1-aiht-2024-75-3770.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10978158/pdf/aiht-75-1-aiht-2024-75-3770.pdf)

## Abstract

Olanzapine treatment sometimes produces transient liver biochemistry abnormalities, and such drug-induced liver injuries are mainly monitored by measuring blood levels of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST), whereas alpha-glutathione-S-transferase (α-GST) is not routinely measured in clinics, even though it can serve as an earlier and more specific biomarker of liver damage. Susceptibility to drug-induced liver injury can much depend on the gene polymorphisms regulating the activity of DNA detoxification and repair enzymes. The aim of this study was to evaluate which of the three liver enzymes – α-GST, ALT, and AST – is the most sensitive biomarker of olanzapine-induced liver injury and how their blood levels are affected by the GSTT1, GSTM1, GSTP1, and OGG1 gene polymorphisms in 30 olanzapine-treated patients. Contrary to our hypothesis, the increase in serum α-GST levels was not significantly greater than that of the transaminases. ALT turned out to be an earlier biomarker of liver injury than the other two enzymes. No significant association was found between gene polymorphisms and liver enzyme levels, save for GSTP1 Ile/Val + Val/Val and ALT, which points to this genotype as a risk factor for drug-induced liver injury. Future studies might help to identify the underlying mechanisms of transient liver enzyme increase associated with this genotype.

Keywords: α-GST, ALT, AST, drug-induced liver injury, mental disorders, psychotropic drugs

## PARTICIPANTS AND METHODS

The study population consisted of 30 patients aged 18–65 years with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorders diagnosed at the Necmettin Erbakan University Psychiatry Clinic in Konya, Turkey according to the criteria of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders IV ([18](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_ref_018)).

Before the treatment started they were naïve to olanzapine. The treatment consisted of olanzapine alone over three months, and its use was verified with serum measurements. Excluded were the patients who had a concurrent psychiatric disorder, a history of drug dependence or mental retardation, and who were taking other potentially hepatotoxic substances. [Table 1](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_tab_001) shows their demographic particulars.

### Table 1.

|   | Mean±SD / N (%) |
| --- | --- |
| Age/Age range (years) | 36.7±14.1/19–63 |
| Gender |  |
| Men | 8 (26.7 %) |
| Women | 22 (73.3 %) |
| Baseline body weight (kg) | 64.8±12.3 |
| Height (cm) | 165.1±8.0 |
| Baseline body mass index (kg/m2) | 23.9±4.6 |
| Smoking | 10 (33.3 %) |

Table 1 Caption: Demographic and clinical characteristics of studied population (N=30)

The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Keçiören Education and Research Hospital (approval No. B.10.4. ISM.4.06.68.49), and written consent was obtained for all participants before admission to the study.

### Blood sampling

For genotyping and enzyme determination we collected venous blood (9 mL) in EDTA tubes for biochemical and DNA analyses before olanzapine treatment (T1, baseline), 10±3 days after starting olanzapine treatment (T2), and 3±1 months after treatment (T3), based on previously published studies ([19](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_ref_019), [20](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_ref_020)).

### Genotyping

DNA was isolated from the whole blood using the sodium perchlorate/chloroform method described in detail earlier ([21](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_ref_021)). For *GSTM1* and *GSTT1* genotyping we used the multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and for *GSTP1* rs1695 *(313 A>G, Ile105Val)* and *OGG1* rs1052133 (*1245 C>G*, *Ser326Cys*) restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)-PCR as described earlier ([22](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_ref_022)).

### GSTM1 gene polymorphisms

A partial gene deletion at the *GSTM1* locus on chromosome 1p13.3 (*GSTM1* null genotype) results in the complete absence of GSTM1 enzyme activity. To detect this deletion we used the following PCR primers: 5′-CGC CAT CTT GTG CTA CAT TGC CCG-3′ (primer 1), 5′-ATC TTC TCC TCT TCT GTC TC-3′ (primer 2), and 5′-TTC TGG ATT GTA GCA GAT CA-3′ (primer 3). PCR was performed in a total volume of 10 µL consisting of 100 ng of genomic DNA, 0.25 mmol/L dNTP, 1.5 mmol/L MgCl_2_, 0.4 µmol/L of each primer, and 1 unit of Taq DNA polymerase in 1 × PCR buffer. The PCR program consisted of a 2 min initial denaturation step at 94 °C, followed by 35 cycles of 1 min denaturation at 94 °C, 90 s annealing at 53 °C, and 2 min elongation at 72 °C. The final elongation was 10 min at 72 °C. The specific size of the *GSTM1* gene PCR product (231 bp) and a control band (158 bp) were assessed after electrophoresis on a 2 % agarose gel.

### GSTT1 gene polymorphism

The *GSTT1* gene deletion on chromosome 22q11.23 was determined with the PCR using the 5′-AGG CAG CAG TGG GGG AGG ACC-3′ forward primer and the 5′-CTC ACC GGA TCA TGG CCA GCA-3′ reverse primer. PCR was performed in a total volume of 10 µL consisting of 100 ng of genomic DNA, 0.2 mmol/L dNTP, 2 mmol/L MgCl_2_, 0.25 µmol/L of each primer, and 1 unit of Taq DNA polymerase in 1 × PCR buffer. The PCR program consisted of a 5 min initial denaturation step at 94 °C, followed by 30 cycles of 1 min denaturation at 94 °C, 1 min annealing at 60 °C, and 2 min elongation at 72 °C. The final elongation was 10 min at 72 °C. The specific sizes of the *GSTT1* product (138 bp) and a control band (158 bp) were assessed after electrophoresis on a 2 % agarose gel.

### GSTP1 gene polymorphism

An *A* to *G* polymorphism at a nucleotide in the *GSTP1* gene 313 results in an amino acid substitution (*Ile105Val*). This residue lies in the enzyme’s substrate-binding site, and the polymorphism has been shown to affect enzyme activity ([22](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_ref_022)). To detect it we used the following primers: 5′-ACC CCA GGG CTC TAT GGG AA-3′ (forward) and 5′-TGA GGG CAC AAG AAG CCC CT-3′ (reverse). PCR was performed in a total volume of 20 µL consisting of 100 ng of genomic DNA, 0.2 mmol/L dNTP, 1.5 mmol/L MgCl_2_, 0.3 µmol/L of each primer, and 1 unit of Taq DNA polymerase in 1 × PCR buffer. The PCR program consisted of a 5 min initial denaturation step at 94 °C, followed by 30 cycles of 30 s denaturation at 94 °C, 30 s annealing at 57 °C, and 30 s elongation at 72 °C. The final elongation was 7 min at 72 °C. After the PCR, a 10 µL aliquot of the amplification product was digested overnight at 37 °C with 4 units of *BsmAI*. The digestion products were separated after electrophoresis on a 3 % NuSieve agarose gel, and the DNA fragments were visualised with 10 mg/mL ethidium bromide. The specific sizes of digestion products were as follows: *Ile/Ile* (wild) 176 bp, *Ile/Val* (heterozygous) 176, 93, and 83 bp, and *Val/Val* (mutant) 93 and 83 bp.

### OGG1 gene polymorphism

To genotype for the *OGG1 Ser326Cys* we used the following primers: 5′-ACT GTC ACT AGT CTC ACC AG-3′ (*OGG1*-forward 5′) and 5′-TGA ATT CGG AAG GTG CTT GGG GAA T-3′ (*OGG1*-reverse 3′). PCR was performed in a total volume of 20 µL consisting of 100 ng of genomic DNA, 0.25 mmol/L dNTP, 1.5 mmol/L MgCl_2_, 0.3 pmol of each primer, and 1 unit of Taq DNA polymerase in 1 × PCR buffer. The PCR program consisted of a 2 min initial denaturation step at 94 °C, followed by 33 cycles of 15 s denaturation at 94 °C, 30 s annealing at 60 °C, and 35 s elongation at 72 °C. The final elongation was 10 min at 72 °C. PCR yielded a 207 base pair product. After PCR, a 10 µL aliquot of the amplification product was digested overnight at 37 °C with 2 units *Fnu4HI*. The digestion products were separated after electrophoresis on a 3 % NuSieve agarose gel, and the DNA fragments were visualised with 10 mg/mL ethidium bromide. The specific sizes of digestion products were as follows: *Ser/Ser* (wild) 207 bp, *Ser/Cys* (heterozygous) 207, 107, and 100 bp, and *Cys/Cys* (mutant) 107 and 100 bp.

### Measurement of serum olanzapine concentrations

Serum olanzapine concentrations were measured with liquid chromatography–electrospray-ionisation-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) (Shimadzu LCMS-8030, Tokyo, Japan) following the validated method of Uřinovská et al. ([23](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_ref_023)) with slight modifications as described earlier ([24](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_ref_024)).

### Measurement of serum aminotransferases and α-GST levels

Serum levels of ALT and AST of patients were obtained from the hospital, whereas serum α-GST was measured with the enzyme-linked immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Microplate Assay for GSTA Product Number: GS41, Oxford Biomedical Research Inc., Oxford, MI, USA).

### Statistical analysis

First we ran the power analysis with the G*power tool, release 3.1 (Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany) ([25](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_ref_025)), which yielded a range from 0.85 to 0.93, confirming that our sample size was sufficient for further analysis. The obtained data were further analysed using the IBM SPSS Statistics version 17.0 (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY, USA). Genotype distribution was checked against the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. The normality of distribution was determined with the Shapiro-Wilk test and the homogeneity of variances with the Levene test. Where applicable, descriptive statistics for continuous variables were expressed as means ± standard deviations (SD) or medians and quartile 1–3 range. The number of cases and percentages were used for categorical data. Mean differences between groups were compared using the Student’s *t*-test or Mann-Whitney *U* test. Differences between time points were evaluated for significance with the repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) using the Wilks’ lambda or Friedman test where applicable. If they were statistically significant, we then ran the Bonferroni correction to control for type I errors for all possible multiple comparisons. Degrees of association between continuous variables were evaluated with Spearman’s rank correlation. A p-value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant.

## RESULTS

[Table 2](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_tab_002) shows mean olanzapine maintenance doses and the distribution of gene polymorphisms in the study population. We found no deviation from the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for any of the genotypes studied.

### Table 2.

|   | Mean±SD |
| --- | --- |
| Mean olanzapine maintenance dosing (mg/kg) | 0.13±0.052 |
| Mean serum olanzapine concentration (T2) | 0.42±0.565 |
| Gene polymorphisms | N (%) |
| GSTM1 |  |
| Positive | 12 (40.0 %) |
| Null | 18 (60.0 %) |
| GSTT1 |  |
| Positive | 22 (73.3 %) |
| Null | 8 (26.7 %) |
| GSTP1 Ile105Val |  |
| Ile/Ile | 14 (46.7 %) |
| Ile/Val + Val/Val | 16 (53.3 %) |
| OGG1 Ser326Cys |  |
| Ser/Ser | 16 (53.3 %) |
| Ser/Cys+Cys/Cys | 14 (46.7 %) |

Table 2 Caption: Olanzapine maintenance doses and distribution of gene polymorphisms in the study population (N=30)

### Liver enzyme levels

[Table 3](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_tab_003) shows that the first 10±3 days of treatment with olanzapine increased the levels of all enzymes compared to their baseline values (T2 vs T1). However, only ALT rose significantly at T2 compared to T1 and dropped to baseline levels at T3, whereas the other two enzymes did not change significantly.

### Table 3.

|   | T1 | T2 | T3 | p-value |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Median (Q1–3) |  |  |  |  |
| α-GST (μg/L) | 2.1 (1.4–3.4) | 3.4 (1.9–6.8) | 2.8 (1.7–4.9) | 0.239 |
| ALT (U/L) | 17.0 (11.0–20.2)a | 25.0 (17.7–44.5)a, b | 17.0 (13.7–24.0)b | 0.039 |
| AST (U/L) | 19.5 (15.7–27.0) | 25.0 (17.0–39.2) | 19.0 (17.0–25.0) | 0.692 |

Table 3 Caption: Liver enzyme levels in olanzapine-treated patients (N=30) measured at three time points

Serum ALT was above the upper limit of normal (ULN of <40 U/L) in seven patients at T2 and in one patient at T3. Only one patient had ALT>2xULN at T2 (clinically mild elevation).

Serum AST levels were above ULN of <40 U/L in six patients at T2 and in one patient at T3. All elevations were below <2×ULN.

### Association between gene polymorphisms and liver enzyme levels

[Tables 4–6](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_tab_004) show no significant associations between gene polymorphisms and the levels of liver enzymes measured at the three time points, save for the association between the *GSTP1 Ile/Val + Val/Val* polymorphism and ALT (p=0.014).

### Table 4.

| Gene polymorphisms | T1 | T2 | T3 | p-value* |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Median (Q1–3) |  |  |  |  |
| GSTM1 |  |  |  |  |
| Positive | 1.7 (1.0–3.3) | 2.8 (1.7–4.7) | 2.2 (1.7–5.7) | 0.717 |
| Null | 2.5 (1.4–3.5) | 4.2 (2.1–7.2) | 2.9 (2.0–4.3) | 0.311 |
| p-value** | 0.368 | 0.415 | 0.692 |   |
| GSTT1 |  |  |  |  |
| Positive | 2.0 (1.3–2.8) | 2.9 (1.9–4.4) | 2.9 (2.1–4.9) | 0.186 |
| Null | 4.0 (1.4–9.8) | 6.4 (2.1–10.1) | 1.8 (1.4–6.5) | 0.607 |
| p-value** | 0.118 | 0.156 | 0.420 |   |
| GSTP1 Ile105Val |  |  |  |  |
| Ile/Ile | 1.9 (1.3–2.8) | 2.9 (1.8–6.2) | 3.3 (1.7–6.5) | 0.395 |
| Ile/Val+Val/Val | 2.6 (1.4–4.2) | 4.0 (2.3–7.0) | 2.4 (1.7–3.4) | 0.305 |
| p-value** | 0.377 | 0.313 | 0.334 |   |
| OGG1 Ser326Cys |  |  |  |  |
| Ser/Ser | 2.8 (1.7–4.3) | 3.6 (1.9–7.4) | 2.9 (2.0–4.3) | 0.646 |
| Ser/Cys+Cys/Cys | 1.6 (1.1–2.6) | 3.4 (1.8–6.2) | 2.3 (1.6–6.1) | 0.257 |
| p-value** | 0.077 | 0.580 | 0.728 |   |

Table 4 Caption: Association between gene polymorphisms and α-GST levels (μg/L) measured at the three time points in olanzapine-treated patients (N=30)

### Table 5.

| Gene polymorphisms | T1 | T2 | T3 | p-value* |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Median (Q1–3) |  |  |  |  |
| GSTM1 |  |  |  |  |
| Positive | 16.5 (12.2–18.5) | 30.0 (15.7–43.2) | 19.0 (10.7–25.7) | 0.090 |
| Null | 17.5 (11.0–24.5) | 23.5 (17.7–46.0) | 16.0 (14.0–22.2) | 0.183 |
| p-value** | 0.632 | 0.917 | 0.819 |   |
| GSTT1 |  |  |  |  |
| Positive | 16.5 (11.0–19.0) | 23.5 (16.7–34.2) | 18.0 (14.7–23.2) | 0.153 |
| Null | 17.5 (11.5–33.7) | 35.0 (18.7–46.0) | 14.5 (10.2–24.7) | 0.223 |
| p-value** | 0.344 | 0.504 | 0.504 |   |
| GSTP1 Ile105Val |  |  |  |  |
| Ile/Ile | 17.0 (13.2–25.2) | 21.0 (16.7–34.7) | 17.0 (13.7–29.0) | 0.323 |
| Ile/Val+Val/Val | 15.0 (11.0–19.0) | 27.5 (19.0–45.5)a | 18.0 (11.7–23.7)a | 0.014 |
| p-value** | 0.608 | 0.355 | 0.822 |   |
| OGG1 Ser326Cys |  |  |  |  |
| Ser/Ser | 16.5 (11.2–18.7) | 24.5 (17.2–38.5) | 17.0 (14.2–20.0) | 0.170 |
| Ser/Cys+Cys/Cys | 17.0 (10.7–26.7) | 26.5 (17.2–51.0) | 19.0 (12.2–29.5) | 0.211 |
| p-value** | 0.918 | 0.697 | 0.697 |   |

Table 5 Caption: Association between gene polymorphisms and ALT levels (U/L) measured at the three time points in olanzapine-treated patients (N=30)

### Table 6.

| Gene polymorphisms | T1 | T2 | T3 | p-value* |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Median (Q1–3) |  |  |  |  |
| GSTM1 |  |  |  |  |
| Positive | 21.5 (16.5–29.2) | 24.5 (16.0–39.7) | 22.0 (16.2–32.0) | 0.770 |
| Null | 19.0 (14.0–26.2) | 25.5 (17.0–39.2) | 19.0 (17.7–21.0) | 0.765 |
| p-value** | 0.545 | 0.662 | 0.305 |   |
| GSTT1 |  |  |  |  |
| Positive | 19.5 (15.7–24.5) | 22.5 (16.7–39.2) | 19.0 (16.7–25.0) | 0.955 |
| Null | 23.0 (15.0–35.7) | 33.0 (21.2–47.2) | 20.5 (18.0–30.2) | 0.368 |
| p-value** | 0.420 | 0.185 | 0.565 |   |
| GSTP1 Ile105Val |  |  |  |  |
| Ile/Ile | 19.0 (15.7–25.0) | 24.5 (18.2–37.7) | 20.5 (17.0–29.7) | 0.982 |
| Ile/Val+Val/Val | 22.5 (15.0–27.0) | 27.5 (17.0–39.7) | 19.0 (16.5–21.7) | 0.399 |
| p-value** | 0.608 | 0.580 | 0.334 |   |
| OGG1 Ser326Cys |  |  |  |  |
| Ser/Ser | 19.0 (15.7–26.2) | 25.5 (17.5–39.7) | 19.5 (18.0–21.7) | 0.814 |
| Ser/Cys+Cys/Cys | 21.0 (15.5–30.2) | 23.0 (16.5–39.2) | 19.0 (16.0–30.7) | 0.801 |
| p-value** | 0.667 | 0.580 | 0.984 |   |

Table 6 Caption: Association between gene polymorphisms and AST levels (U/L) measured at three predetermined time points in olanzapine-treated patients (N=30)

## DISCUSSION

Previous studies have generally evaluated the importance of α-GST in individuals with acute and chronic liver disease (such as hepatitis, chronic liver disease and cirrhosis) and compared it with ALT and AST. It has been suggested that α-GST may be used to confirm ALT and AST results in hepatocellular damage, that is, as an indicator of advanced damage ([26](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_ref_026)). A few case studies of olanzapine ([27](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_ref_027), [28](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_ref_028)) report patients developing olanzapine-induced elevation of liver enzymes and liver-related diseases, but the underlying mechanism was unknown. These enzymes returned to normal levels after the drug was discontinued.

Our findings do not confirm our hypothesis that olanzapine treatment significantly increases serum α-GST early into the treatment or that it can serve as an earlier biomarker of liver injury than ALT or AST in these patients. Instead, ALT turned out to be the only significant early biomarker of liver injury, however mild, which is in line with several earlier reports ([20](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_ref_020), [29](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_ref_029)).

Furthermore, we found no significant association between gene polymorphisms and liver enzyme levels, save for the one between the *GSTP1 Ile/Val + Val/Val* genotype and ALT, which suggests that carriers of this specific genotype might be at a higher risk of drug-induced liver injury. However, since our findings are limited to 30 patients, this and other associations between gene polymorphisms and liver enzyme levels call for further investigation in a much larger population sample.

Even so, our study points to the need to monitor all three enzymes in clinical practice to minimise the risk of liver injury in patients receiving long-term olanzapine treatment and is in line with a number of (case) reports of transient liver biochemistry abnormalities in olanzapine patients ([27](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_ref_027), [28](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_ref_028), [30](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_ref_030), [31](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_ref_031), [32](#j_aiht-2024-75-3770_ref_032)). More importantly, though, it calls for an investigation in a much larger sample to identify the real risks. Besides a small sample, our study is also limited in the sense that we have not considered other risk factors, such as obesity or age, since our study period was relatively short.

## CONCLUSIONS

Considering that the changes in ALT, AST, and α-GST levels were not significant, we cannot claim that olanzapine induced liver damage. However, the three biomarkers showed a similar rise and fall pattern, which suggests that α-GST could be used to monitor liver damage in olanzapine treatment along with ALT and AST. ALT turned out to be a superior biomarker to α-GST or AST, and the *GSTP1 Val/Val* genotype stood out as associated with higher ALT levels in olanzapine treatment. At this point, however, we cannot identify the underlying mechanism for this association. Perhaps a study of the kind in patients with liver disease causing severe changes in liver enzymes will provide the answer. In any case, further more comprehensive studies are needed to answer the questions raised by this one.

## Acknowledgments

This study was supported by the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) (project No.: 115S229).

## Footnotes

## References

1. NIH National Library of Medicine. LiverTox: Clinical and Research Information on Drug-Induced Liver Injury. Bethesda (MD): National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases; 2012. [displayed 15 February 2024]. Available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK547852/  [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK547852/](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK547852/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31643176/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=LiverTox:%20Clinical%20and%20Research%20Information%20on%20Drug-Induced%20Liver%20Injury&publication_year=2012&)

2. David S, Hamilton JP. Drug-induced liver injury. US Gastroenterol Hepatol Rev. 2010;6:73–80.  [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3160634/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21874146/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=US%20Gastroenterol%20Hepatol%20Rev&title=Drug-induced%20liver%20injury&author=S%20David&author=JP%20Hamilton&volume=6&publication_year=2010&pages=73-80&pmid=21874146&)

3. Abdel-Moneim SM, Sliem H. Significance of serum alpha-glutathione S-transferase assessment in hepatitis C patients with different alanine aminotransferase patterns. Gastroenterology Res. 2011;4:13–9. doi: 10.4021/gr269w.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.4021/gr269w) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5139795/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27957007/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gastroenterology%20Res&title=Significance%20of%20serum%20alpha-glutathione%20S-transferase%20assessment%20in%20hepatitis%20C%20patients%20with%20different%20alanine%20aminotransferase%20patterns&author=SM%20Abdel-Moneim&author=H%20Sliem&volume=4&publication_year=2011&pages=13-9&pmid=27957007&doi=10.4021/gr269w&)

4. Giffen PS, Pick CR, Price MA, Williams A, York MJ. Alpha-glutathione S-transferase in the assessment of hepatotoxicity - its diagnostic utility in comparison with other recognized markers in the Wistar Han rat. Toxicol Pathol. 2002;30:365–72. doi: 10.1080/01926230252929945.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/01926230252929945) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12051554/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Toxicol%20Pathol&title=Alpha-glutathione%20S-transferase%20in%20the%20assessment%20of%20hepatotoxicity%20-%20its%20diagnostic%20utility%20in%20comparison%20with%20other%20recognized%20markers%20in%20the%20Wistar%20Han%20rat&author=PS%20Giffen&author=CR%20Pick&author=MA%20Price&author=A%20Williams&author=MJ%20York&volume=30&publication_year=2002&pages=365-72&pmid=12051554&doi=10.1080/01926230252929945&)

5. Maina I, Rule JA, Wians FH, Poirier M, Grant L, Lee WM. α-glutathione S-transferase: a new biomarker for liver injury? J Appl Lab Med. 2016;1:119–28. doi: 10.1373/jalm.2016.020412.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1373/jalm.2016.020412) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33626782/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Appl%20Lab%20Med&title=%CE%B1-glutathione%20S-transferase:%20a%20new%20biomarker%20for%20liver%20injury?&author=I%20Maina&author=JA%20Rule&author=FH%20Wians&author=M%20Poirier&author=L%20Grant&volume=1&publication_year=2016&pages=119-28&pmid=33626782&doi=10.1373/jalm.2016.020412&)

6. Chen M, Suzuki A, Borlak J, Andrade RJ, Lucena MI. Drug-induced liver injury: Interactions between drug properties and host factors. J Hepatol. 2015;63:503–14. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2015.04.016.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2015.04.016) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25912521/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Hepatol&title=Drug-induced%20liver%20injury:%20Interactions%20between%20drug%20properties%20and%20host%20factors&author=M%20Chen&author=A%20Suzuki&author=J%20Borlak&author=RJ%20Andrade&author=MI%20Lucena&volume=63&publication_year=2015&pages=503-14&pmid=25912521&doi=10.1016/j.jhep.2015.04.016&)

7. Zhou Y, Wang J, Zhang D, Liu J, Wu Q, Chen J, Tan P, Xing B, Han Y, Zhang P, Xiao X, Pei J. Mechanism of drug-induced liver injury and hepatoprotective effects of natural drugs. Chin Med. 2021;16(1):135. doi: 10.1186/s13020-021-00543-x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13020-021-00543-x) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8665608/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34895294/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Chin%20Med&title=Mechanism%20of%20drug-induced%20liver%20injury%20and%20hepatoprotective%20effects%20of%20natural%20drugs&author=Y%20Zhou&author=J%20Wang&author=D%20Zhang&author=J%20Liu&author=Q%20Wu&volume=16&issue=1&publication_year=2021&pages=135&pmid=34895294&doi=10.1186/s13020-021-00543-x&)

8. Prysyazhnyuk V, Sydorchuk L, Sydorchuk R, Prysiazhniuk I, Bobkovych K, Buzdugan I, Dzuryak V, Prysyazhnyuk P. Glutathione-S-transferases genes-promising predictors of hepatic dysfunction. World J Hepatol. 2021;13:620–33. doi: 10.4254/wjh.v13.i6.620.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.4254/wjh.v13.i6.620) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8239493/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34239698/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=World%20J%20Hepatol&title=Glutathione-S-transferases%20genes-promising%20predictors%20of%20hepatic%20dysfunction&author=V%20Prysyazhnyuk&author=L%20Sydorchuk&author=R%20Sydorchuk&author=I%20Prysiazhniuk&author=K%20Bobkovych&volume=13&publication_year=2021&pages=620-33&pmid=34239698&doi=10.4254/wjh.v13.i6.620&)

9. Chanhom N, Wattanapokayakit S, Satproedprai N, Suvichapanich S, Mahasirimongkol S, Chaikledkaew U, Udomsinprasert W, Mushiroda T, Jittikoon J. CYP2E1, GSTM1, and GSTT1 genetic polymorphisms and their associations with susceptibility to antituberculosis drug-induced liver injury in Thai tuberculosis patients. Heliyon. 2021;7:e06852. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e06852.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e06852) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC8082558/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33981901/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Heliyon&title=CYP2E1,%20GSTM1,%20and%20GSTT1%20genetic%20polymorphisms%20and%20their%20associations%20with%20susceptibility%20to%20antituberculosis%20drug-induced%20liver%20injury%20in%20Thai%20tuberculosis%20patients&author=N%20Chanhom&author=S%20Wattanapokayakit&author=N%20Satproedprai&author=S%20Suvichapanich&author=S%20Mahasirimongkol&volume=7&publication_year=2021&pages=e06852&pmid=33981901&doi=10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e06852&)

10. Lucena MI, Andrade RJ, Martínez C, Ulzurrun E, García-Martín E, Borraz Y, Fernández MC, Romero-Gomez M, Castiella A, Planas R, Costa J, Anzola S, Agúndez JAG. Glutathione S-transferase M1 and T1 null genotypes increase susceptibility to idiosyncratic drug-induced liver injury. Hepatology. 2008;48:588–96. doi: 10.1002/hep.22370.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.22370) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18666253/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hepatology&title=Glutathione%20S-transferase%20M1%20and%20T1%20null%20genotypes%20increase%20susceptibility%20to%20idiosyncratic%20drug-induced%20liver%20injury&author=MI%20Lucena&author=RJ%20Andrade&author=C%20Mart%C3%ADnez&author=E%20Ulzurrun&author=E%20Garc%C3%ADa-Mart%C3%ADn&volume=48&publication_year=2008&pages=588-96&pmid=18666253&doi=10.1002/hep.22370&)

11. Gawryluk JW, Wang JF, Andreazza AC, Shao L, Yatham LN, Young LT. Prefrontal cortex glutathione S-transferase levels in patients with bipolar disorder, major depression and schizophrenia. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2011;14:1069–74. doi: 10.1017/S1461145711000617.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1017/S1461145711000617) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21733244/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int%20J%20Neuropsychopharmacol&title=Prefrontal%20cortex%20glutathione%20S-transferase%20levels%20in%20patients%20with%20bipolar%20disorder,%20major%20depression%20and%20schizophrenia&author=JW%20Gawryluk&author=JF%20Wang&author=AC%20Andreazza&author=L%20Shao&author=LN%20Yatham&volume=14&publication_year=2011&pages=1069-74&pmid=21733244&doi=10.1017/S1461145711000617&)

12. Fu S, Wu D, Jiang W, Li J, Long J, Jia C, Zhou T. Molecular biomarkers in drug-induced liver injury: challenges and future perspectives. Front Pharmacol. 2020;10:1667. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2019.01667.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2019.01667) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7002317/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32082163/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front%20Pharmacol&title=Molecular%20biomarkers%20in%20drug-induced%20liver%20injury:%20challenges%20and%20future%20perspectives&author=S%20Fu&author=D%20Wu&author=W%20Jiang&author=J%20Li&author=J%20Long&volume=10&publication_year=2020&pages=1667&pmid=32082163&doi=10.3389/fphar.2019.01667&)

13. Karahalil B, Engin AB, Coşkun E. Could 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase 1 Ser326Cys polymorphism be a biomarker of susceptibility in cancer? Toxicol Ind Health. 2014;30:814–25. doi: 10.1177/0748233712463777.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1177/0748233712463777) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23081862/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Toxicol%20Ind%20Health&title=Could%208-oxoguanine%20DNA%20glycosylase%201%20Ser326Cys%20polymorphism%20be%20a%20biomarker%20of%20susceptibility%20in%20cancer?&author=B%20Karahalil&author=AB%20Engin&author=E%20Co%C5%9Fkun&volume=30&publication_year=2014&pages=814-25&pmid=23081862&doi=10.1177/0748233712463777&)

14. Pinheiro DS, Santos RDS, de Brito RB, Cruz AHDs, Ghedini PC, Reis AAS. GSTM1/GSTT1 double-null genotype increases risk of treatment-resistant schizophrenia: A genetic association study in Brazilian patients. PLoS One. 2017;12(8):e0183812. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0183812.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0183812) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5570380/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28837637/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20One&title=GSTM1/GSTT1%20double-null%20genotype%20increases%20risk%20of%20treatment-resistant%20schizophrenia:%20A%20genetic%20association%20study%20in%20Brazilian%20patients&author=DS%20Pinheiro&author=RDS%20Santos&author=RB%20de%20Brito&author=AHDs%20Cruz&author=PC%20Ghedini&volume=12&issue=8&publication_year=2017&pages=e0183812&pmid=28837637&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0183812&)

15. Kim SK, Kang SW, Chung JH, Park HJ, Cho KB, Park MS. Genetic polymorphisms of glutathione-related enzymes (GSTM1, GSTT1, and GSTP1) and schizophrenia risk: A meta-analysis. Int J Mol Sci. 2015;16:19602–11. doi: 10.3390/ijms160819602.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms160819602) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4581314/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26295386/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int%20J%20Mol%20Sci&title=Genetic%20polymorphisms%20of%20glutathione-related%20enzymes%20(GSTM1,%20GSTT1,%20and%20GSTP1)%20and%20schizophrenia%20risk:%20A%20meta-analysis&author=SK%20Kim&author=SW%20Kang&author=JH%20Chung&author=HJ%20Park&author=KB%20Cho&volume=16&publication_year=2015&pages=19602-11&pmid=26295386&doi=10.3390/ijms160819602&)

16. Yan C, Duan L, Fu C, Tian C, Zhang B, Shao X, Zhu G. Association between glutathione S-sransferase (GST) polymorphisms and schizophrenia in a Chinese Han population. Neuropsych Dis Treat. 2020;16:479–87. doi: 10.2147/NDT.S235043.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2147/NDT.S235043) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC7038391/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32110022/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuropsych%20Dis%20Treat&title=Association%20between%20glutathione%20S-sransferase%20(GST)%20polymorphisms%20and%20schizophrenia%20in%20a%20Chinese%20Han%20population&author=C%20Yan&author=L%20Duan&author=C%20Fu&author=C%20Tian&author=B%20Zhang&volume=16&publication_year=2020&pages=479-87&pmid=32110022&doi=10.2147/NDT.S235043&)

17. Sakata S, Shinkai T. A functional polymorphism (Ser326Cys) of the human 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase (hOGG1) gene and schizophrenia. Psychiat Res. 2010;177:268–9. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2010.02.007.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2010.02.007) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20304505/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Psychiat%20Res&title=A%20functional%20polymorphism%20(Ser326Cys)%20of%20the%20human%208-oxoguanine%20DNA%20glycosylase%20(hOGG1)%20gene%20and%20schizophrenia&author=S%20Sakata&author=T%20Shinkai&volume=177&publication_year=2010&pages=268-9&pmid=20304505&doi=10.1016/j.psychres.2010.02.007&)

18. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of mental Disorders. 4th ed. Washington (DC): American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc.; 1994. [displayed 15 February 2024]. Available at https://img3.reoveme.com/m/2ab8dabd068b16a5.pdf.  [https://img3.reoveme.com/m/2ab8dabd068b16a5.pdf](https://img3.reoveme.com/m/2ab8dabd068b16a5.pdf) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Diagnostic%20and%20Statistical%20Manual%20of%20mental%20Disorders&publication_year=1994&)

19. Dumortier G, Cabaret W, Stamatiadis L, Saba G, Benadhira R, Rocamora JF, Aubriot-Delmas B, Glikman J, Januel D. Tolérance hépatique des antipsychotiques atypiques [Hepatic tolerance of atypical antipsychotic drugs, in French] Encephale. 2002;28(6 Pt 1):542–51.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12506267/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Encephale&title=Tol%C3%A9rance%20h%C3%A9patique%20des%20antipsychotiques%20atypiques%20%5BHepatic%20tolerance%20of%20atypical%20antipsychotic%20drugs,%20in%20French%5D&author=G%20Dumortier&author=W%20Cabaret&author=L%20Stamatiadis&author=G%20Saba&author=R%20Benadhira&volume=28&issue=6%20Pt%201&publication_year=2002&pages=542-51&pmid=12506267&)

20. Atasoy N, Erdogan A, Yalug I, Ozturk U, Konuk N, Atik L, Ustundag Y. A review of liver function tests during treatment with atypical antipsychotic drugs: a chart review study. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2007;31:1255–60. doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2007.05.005.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2007.05.005) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17600607/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Prog%20Neuropsychopharmacol%20Biol%20Psychiatry&title=A%20review%20of%20liver%20function%20tests%20during%20treatment%20with%20atypical%20antipsychotic%20drugs:%20a%20chart%20review%20study&author=N%20Atasoy&author=A%20Erdogan&author=I%20Yalug&author=U%20Ozturk&author=N%20Konuk&volume=31&publication_year=2007&pages=1255-60&pmid=17600607&doi=10.1016/j.pnpbp.2007.05.005&)

21. Karahalil B, Kocabaş NA. hOGG1 SER326CYS genetic polymorphism in a Turkish population. Arch Toxicol. 2005;79:377–80. doi: 10.1007/s00204-005-0665-5.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00204-005-0665-5) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15834708/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Arch%20Toxicol&title=hOGG1%20SER326CYS%20genetic%20polymorphism%20in%20a%20Turkish%20population&author=B%20Karahalil&author=NA%20Kocaba%C5%9F&volume=79&publication_year=2005&pages=377-80&pmid=15834708&doi=10.1007/s00204-005-0665-5&)

22. Gönül N, Kadioglu E, Kocabaş NA, Ozkaya M, Karakaya AE, Karahalil B. The role of GSTM1, GSTT1, GSTP1, andOGG1 polymorphisms in type 2 diabetes mellitus risk: A case-control study in a Turkish population. Gene. 2012;505:121–7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.05.025.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2012.05.025) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22652274/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gene&title=The%20role%20of%20GSTM1,%20GSTT1,%20GSTP1,%20andOGG1%20polymorphisms%20in%20type%202%20diabetes%20mellitus%20risk:%20A%20case-control%20study%20in%20a%20Turkish%20population&author=N%20G%C3%B6n%C3%BCl&author=E%20Kadioglu&author=NA%20Kocaba%C5%9F&author=M%20Ozkaya&author=AE%20Karakaya&volume=505&publication_year=2012&pages=121-7&pmid=22652274&doi=10.1016/j.gene.2012.05.025&)

23. Uřinovská R, Brozmanová H, Sištík P, Silhán P, Kacířová I, Lemr K, Grundmann M. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry method for determination of five antidepressants and four atypical antipsychotics and their main metabolites in human serum. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2012;907:101–7. doi: 10.1016/j.jchromb.2012.09.009.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jchromb.2012.09.009) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23026228/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Chromatogr%20B%20Analyt%20Technol%20Biomed%20Life%20Sci&title=Liquid%20chromatography-tandem%20mass%20spectrometry%20method%20for%20determination%20of%20five%20antidepressants%20and%20four%20atypical%20antipsychotics%20and%20their%20main%20metabolites%20in%20human%20serum&author=R%20U%C5%99inovsk%C3%A1&author=H%20Brozmanov%C3%A1&author=P%20Si%C5%A1t%C3%ADk&author=P%20Silh%C3%A1n&author=I%20Kac%C3%AD%C5%99ov%C3%A1&volume=907&publication_year=2012&pages=101-7&pmid=23026228&doi=10.1016/j.jchromb.2012.09.009&)

24. Karahalil B, Elkama A, Ak M, Nemutlu E. Metabolomics mapping changed after olanzapine therapy in drug-naive schizophrenia patients-the significant impact of gene polymorphisms. Toxicol Res (Camb) 2022;11:547–56. doi: 10.1093/toxres/tfac034.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/toxres/tfac034) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC9244978/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35782649/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Toxicol%20Res%20(Camb)&title=Metabolomics%20mapping%20changed%20after%20olanzapine%20therapy%20in%20drug-naive%20schizophrenia%20patients-the%20significant%20impact%20of%20gene%20polymorphisms&author=B%20Karahalil&author=A%20Elkama&author=M%20Ak&author=E%20Nemutlu&volume=11&publication_year=2022&pages=547-56&pmid=35782649&doi=10.1093/toxres/tfac034&)

25. Faul F, Erdfelder E, Lang AG, Buchner A. G*Power 3: A flexible statistical power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. Behav Res Methods. 2007;39:175–91. doi: 10.3758/BF03193146.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03193146) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17695343/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Behav%20Res%20Methods&title=G*Power%203:%20A%20flexible%20statistical%20power%20analysis%20program%20for%20the%20social,%20behavioral,%20and%20biomedical%20sciences&author=F%20Faul&author=E%20Erdfelder&author=AG%20Lang&author=A%20Buchner&volume=39&publication_year=2007&pages=175-91&pmid=17695343&doi=10.3758/BF03193146&)

26. Czuczejko J, Mila-Kierzenkowska C, Szewczyk-Golec K. Plasma α-glutathione S-transferase evaluation in patients with acute and chronic liver injury. Can J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019;2019:5850787. doi: 10.1155/2019/5850787.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/5850787) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6854929/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31772928/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Can%20J%20Gastroenterol%20Hepatol&title=Plasma%20%CE%B1-glutathione%20S-transferase%20evaluation%20in%20patients%20with%20acute%20and%20chronic%20liver%20injury&author=J%20Czuczejko&author=C%20Mila-Kierzenkowska&author=K%20Szewczyk-Golec&volume=2019&publication_year=2019&pages=5850787&pmid=31772928&doi=10.1155/2019/5850787&)

27. Kolpe M, Ravasia S. Effect of olanzapine on the liver transaminases. Can J Psychiatry. 2003;48(3):210. doi: 10.1177/070674370304800313.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1177/070674370304800313) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12728748/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Can%20J%20Psychiatry&title=Effect%20of%20olanzapine%20on%20the%20liver%20transaminases&author=M%20Kolpe&author=S%20Ravasia&volume=48&issue=3&publication_year=2003&pages=210&pmid=12728748&doi=10.1177/070674370304800313&)

28. Lui SY, Tso S, Lam M, Cheung EF. Possible olanzapine-induced hepatotoxicity in a young Chinese patient. Hong Kong Med J. 2009;15:394–6.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19801701/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hong%20Kong%20Med%20J&title=Possible%20olanzapine-induced%20hepatotoxicity%20in%20a%20young%20Chinese%20patient&author=SY%20Lui&author=S%20Tso&author=M%20Lam&author=EF%20Cheung&volume=15&publication_year=2009&pages=394-6&pmid=19801701&)

29. Ciba M, Ak M, Karahalil B. Alpha-glutathione-s-transferase can be a biomarker for both drug-related toxicity as well as individual susceptibility. Minerva Psichiatrica. 2016;57:62–71.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Minerva%20Psichiatrica&title=Alpha-glutathione-s-transferase%20can%20be%20a%20biomarker%20for%20both%20drug-related%20toxicity%20as%20well%20as%20individual%20susceptibility&author=M%20Ciba&author=M%20Ak&author=B%20Karahalil&volume=57&publication_year=2016&pages=62-71&)

30. Manceaux P, Constant E, Zdanowicz N, Jacques D, Reynaert C. Management of marked liver enzyme increase during olanzapine treatment: a case report and review of the literature. Psychiatr Danub. 2011;23(Suppl 1):S15–7.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21894094/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Psychiatr%20Danub&title=Management%20of%20marked%20liver%20enzyme%20increase%20during%20olanzapine%20treatment:%20a%20case%20report%20and%20review%20of%20the%20literature&author=P%20Manceaux&author=E%20Constant&author=N%20Zdanowicz&author=D%20Jacques&author=C%20Reynaert&volume=23&issue=Suppl%201&publication_year=2011&pages=S15-7&pmid=21894094&)

31. Ozcanli T, Erdogan A, Ozdemir S, Onen B, Ozmen M, Doksat K, Sonsuz A. Severe liver enzyme elevations after three years of olanzapine treatment: a case report and review of olanzapine associated hepatotoxicity. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2006;30:1163–6. doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2006.03.014.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2006.03.014) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16632162/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Prog%20Neuropsychopharmacol%20Biol%20Psychiatry&title=Severe%20liver%20enzyme%20elevations%20after%20three%20years%20of%20olanzapine%20treatment:%20a%20case%20report%20and%20review%20of%20olanzapine%20associated%20hepatotoxicity&author=T%20Ozcanli&author=A%20Erdogan&author=S%20Ozdemir&author=B%20Onen&author=M%20Ozmen&volume=30&publication_year=2006&pages=1163-6&pmid=16632162&doi=10.1016/j.pnpbp.2006.03.014&)

32. Tohen M, Kryzhanovskaya L, Carlson G, Delbello M, Wozniak J, Kowatch R, Wagner K, Findling R, Lin D, Robertson-Plouch C, Xu W, Dittmann RW, Biederman J. Olanzapine versus placebo in the treatment of adolescents with bipolar mania. Am J Psychiatry. 2007;164:1547–56. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2007.06111932.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2007.06111932) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17898346/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Psychiatry&title=Olanzapine%20versus%20placebo%20in%20the%20treatment%20of%20adolescents%20with%20bipolar%20mania&author=M%20Tohen&author=L%20Kryzhanovskaya&author=G%20Carlson&author=M%20Delbello&author=J%20Wozniak&volume=164&publication_year=2007&pages=1547-56&pmid=17898346&doi=10.1176/appi.ajp.2007.06111932&)
