# Screening for UGT1A1 Genotype in Study A5257 Would Have Markedly Reduced Premature Discontinuation of Atazanavir for Hyperbilirubinemia.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Saran Vardhanabhuti, Heather J Ribaudo, Raphael J Landovitz, Ighovwerha Ofotokun, Jeffrey L Lennox, Judith S Currier, Lana M Olson, David W Haas
**Journal:** Open forum infectious diseases
**Year:** 2015
**PMID:** 26180834

## Abstract

Background.  Some patients are not prescribed atazanavir because of concern about possible jaundice. Atazanavir-associated hyperbilirubinemia correlates with UGT1A1 rs887829 genotype. We examined bilirubin-related discontinuation of atazanavir in participants from AIDS Clinical Trials Group Study A5257. Methods.  Discriminatory properties of UGT1A1 T/T genotype for predicting bilirubin-related atazanavir discontinuation through 96 weeks after antiretroviral initiation were estimated. Results.  Genetic analyses involved 1450 participants, including 481 who initiated randomized atazanavir/ritonavir. Positive predictive values of rs887829 T/T for bilirubin-related discontinuation of atazanavir (with 95% confidence intervals [CIs]) were 20% (CI, 9%-36%) in Black, 60% (CI, 32%-84%) in White, and 29% (CI, 8%-58%) in Hispanic participants; negative predictive values were 97% (CI, 93%-99%), 95% (CI, 90%-98%), and 97% (CI, 90%-100%), respectively. Conclusions.  Bilirubin-related discontinuation of atazanavir was rare in participants not homozygous for rs887829 T/T, regardless of race or ethnicity. We hypothesize that the higher rate of discontinuation among White participants homozygous for rs887829 T/T may reflect differences in physical manifestations of jaundice by race and ethnicity. Selective avoidance of atazanavir initiation among individuals with T/T genotypes would markedly reduce the likelihood of bilirubin-related discontinuation of atazanavir while allowing atazanavir to be prescribed to the majority of individuals. This genetic association will also affect atazanavir/cobicistat.
