# Very low penetrance of hearing loss in seven Han Chinese pedigrees carrying the deafness-associated 12S rRNA A1555G mutation.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Xiaowen Tang, Li Yang, Yi Zhu, Zhisu Liao, Jindan Wang, Yaping Qian, Zhihua Tao, Lenong Hu, Guomin Wu, Jinshan Lan, Xinjian Wang, Jingzhang Ji, Jian Wu, Yu Ji, Jinbao Feng, Jianfu Chen, Zhiyuan Li, Xue Zhang, Jianxin Lu, Min-Xin Guan
**Journal:** Gene
**Year:** 2007
**PMID:** 17341440

## Abstract

Mutations in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) have been found to be associated with sensorineural hearing loss. We report here the clinical, genetic and molecular characterizations of seven Han Chinese pedigrees with aminoglycoside-induced and nonsyndromic bilateral hearing loss. Clinical evaluation revealed the variable phenotype of hearing impairment including severity, age-at-onset and audiometric configuration in these subjects. The penetrance of hearing loss in these pedigrees ranged from 3% to 29%, with an average of 13.6%, when aminoglycoside-induced deafness was included. When the effect of aminoglycosides was excluded, the penetrances of hearing loss in these seven pedigrees varied from 0% to 17%, with an average of 5.3%. Sequence analysis of the complete mitochondrial genomes in these pedigrees showed the presence of the deafness-associated 12S rRNA A1555G mutation, in addition to distinct sets of mtDNA polymorphism belonging to East Asian haplogroups B4, D4, D5 and F1, respectively. This suggested that the A1555G mutation occurred sporadically and multiplied through evolution of the mtDNA in China. Despite the presence of several evolutionary conservative variants in protein-encoding genes, there was the absence of functionally significant mutations in tRNA and rRNAs or secondary LHON mutations in these seven Chinese families. These suggest that these mtDNA haplogroup-specific variants may not play an important role in the phenotypic expression of the A1555G mutation in those Chinese families with very low penetrance of hearing loss. However, aminoglycosides appear to be a major modifier factor for the phenotypic manifestation of the A1555G mutation in these Chinese families.
