# Unknown Title

## Metadata
**Authors:** Espen Molden, Marin M Jukić
**Journal:** Frontiers in pharmacology
**Year:** 2021
**PMID:** 33967790

## Abstract

Genetic differences in cytochrome P450 (CYP)-mediated metabolism have been known for several decades. The clinically most important polymorphic CYP enzyme is CYP2D6, which plays a key role in the metabolism of many antidepressants and antipsychotics, along with a range of non-psychiatric medications. Dose individualization based on CYP2D6 genotype to improve the effect and safety of drug treatment has been an ambition for a long time. Clinical use of CYP2D6 genotyping is steadily increasing; however, for pre-emptive genotyping to be successful in predicting individual dose requirements, high precision of genotype-to-phenotype translations are required. Recently, guidelines for assigning CYP2D6 enzyme activity scores of CYP2D6 variant alleles, and subsequent diplotype-to-phenotype translations, were published by the Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (CPIC) and the Dutch Pharmacogenetics Working Group. Consensus on assigning activity scores of CYP2D6 variant alleles and translating diplotype scores into CYP2D6 poor, intermediate, normal, or ultrarapid metabolizer groups were obtained by consulting 37 international experts. While assigning enzyme activities of non-functional (score 0) and fully functional (score 1) alleles are straightforward, reduced function variant alleles are more complex. In this article, we present data showing that the assigned activity scores of reduced function variant alleles in current guidelines are not of sufficient precision; especially not for CYP2D6*41, where the guideline activity score is 0.5 compared to 0.05-0.15 in pharmacogenetic studies. Due to these discrepancies, CYP2D6 genotypes with similar guidelinediplotype scores exhibit substantial differences in CYP2D6 metabolizer phenotypes. Thus, it is important that the guidelines are updated to be valid in predicting individual dose requirements of psychiatric drugs and others metabolized by CYP2D6.
