# Fatal intoxication cases: cytochrome P450 2D6 and 2C19 genotype distributions.

## Metadata
**Authors:** A L Zackrisson, P Holmgren, A B Gladh, J Ahlner, B Lindblom
**Journal:** European journal of clinical pharmacology
**Year:** 2004
**PMID:** 15349706

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVE:** Many commonly used pharmaceuticals, such as antidepressants and neuroleptics as well as some illegal drugs, are metabolised by the cytochrome P450 enzyme debrisoquine 4-hydroxylase (CYP2D6). Of Caucasians, 7-10% lack this enzyme, which can, upon administration of drugs in normal therapeutic doses, lead to adverse reactions and unexpected intoxication, leading in turn even to a fatal outcome in some cases.

**METHODS:** Individuals (n=242) who had died due to intoxication by pharmaceuticals were genotyped for CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 and compared with a reference group of 281 blood donors. A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) method was used to identify five CYP2D6 alleles: *1 (wt), *2, *3, *4 and *6. The allele *5, a complete gene deletion, was identified by a multiplex amplification of long DNA fragments. Four CYP2C19 alleles *1 (wt), *2, *3 and *4 were also identified by SNP analysis.

**RESULTS:** The prevalence of the CYP2D6 poor metaboliser (PM) genotypes in individuals with fatal intoxication was lower (4.7%) than expected from the frequencies of these genotypes in the blood donors (8.5%). A significantly lower frequency P<0.005 (0.03 with correction according to Bonferroni) was found for the CYP2D6*4 allele among the fatal intoxication cases. The CYP2C19 genotype analyses showed the same results for the fatal intoxication cases and for the blood donors.

**CONCLUSIONS:** The findings in this study confirm our earlier observations of a lower frequency of CYP2D6 PM genotypes in cases of fatal intoxication. To our knowledge, it has not been shown previously that intoxication victims might have a lower frequency of PMs than the general population.
