# Characterization of the CYP2D6 drug metabolizing phenotypes of the Chilean mestizo population through polymorphism analyses.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Nelson Varela, Luis A Quiñones, Jana Stojanova, Joselyn Garay, Dante Cáceres, Silvia Cespedes, Jaime Sasso, Carla Miranda
**Journal:** Pharmacological research
**Year:** 2015
**PMID:** 26211952

## Abstract

We tested the influence of four polymorphisms and gene duplication in CYP2D6 on in vivo enzyme activity in a Chilean mestizo population in order to identify the most relevant genetic profiles that account for observed phenotypes in this ethnic group. CYP2D6*2 (2850C>T), *3 (2549A>del), *4 (1846G>A), *17 (1023C>T) and gene duplication were determined by PCR-RFLP or PCRL in a group of 321 healthy volunteers. Individuals with different variant alleles were phenotyped by determining debrisoquine 4-hydroxylase activity as a metabolic ratio (MR) using a validated HPLC assay. Minor allele frequencies were 0.41, 0.01, 0.12 and 0.00 for CYP2D6*2, *3, *4 and *17 variants, respectively, and the duplication frequency was 0.003. Genotype analysis correlated with phenotypes in 18 of 23 subjects (78.3%). 11 subjects were extensive metabolizers (EM), 8 were intermediate metabolizers (IM), 2 were poor metabolizers (PM) and 2 were ultra-rapid metabolizers (UM) which is fairly coincident with expected phenotypes metabolic ratios ranged from 0.11 to 126.41. The influence of CYP2D6*3 was particularly notable, although only heterozygote carriers were present in our population. Individuals homozygous for *4 were always PM. As expected, the only subject with gene duplication was UM. In conclusion, there was a clear effect of genotype on observed CYP2D6 activity. Classification of EM, PM and UM through genotyping was useful to characterize CYP2D6 phenotype in the Chilean mestizo population.
