# Pharmacokinetics of diltiazem and its metabolites in relation to CYP2D6 genotype.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Espen Molden, Per Wiik Johansen, Grethe Helen Bøe, Stein Bergan, Hege Christensen, Hans Erik Rugstad, Helge Rootwelt, Leon Reubsaet, Gustav Lehne
**Journal:** Clinical pharmacology and therapeutics
**Year:** 2002
**PMID:** 12235455

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVES:** Recently, it was shown in vitro that the polymorphic enzyme cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6 mediates O-demethylation of diltiazem. The aim of this study was to compare the pharmacokinetics of diltiazem and its major metabolites in healthy human volunteers representing different CYP2D6 genotypes.

**METHODS:** Norwegians of Caucasian origin were screened for their CYP2D6 genotype on the LightCycler (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) by melting-curve analysis of allele-specific fluorescence resonance energy transfer probes hybridized to polymerase chain reaction-amplified deoxyribonucleic acid. The first 5 individuals identified with genotypes corresponding to a homozygous extensive, heterozygous extensive, or homozygous poor CYP2D6-metabolizing phenotype, respectively, were voluntarily enrolled in the pharmacokinetic study. The participants received diltiazem, 120 mg, as a single oral dose, and plasma samples were collected up to 24 hours after administration. Plasma samples were purified by solid phase extraction. Diltiazem and 7 phase I metabolites were analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.

**RESULTS:** The pharmacokinetics of diltiazem was not significantly different between the subgroups. However, the systemic exposure of the pharmacologically active metabolites desacetyl diltiazem and N-demethyldesacetyl diltiazem was > or = 5 times higher in poor CYP2D6 metabolizers than in extensive CYP2D6 metabolizers (P <.01).

**CONCLUSIONS:** CYP2D6 activity does not have a major impact on the disposition of diltiazem. In contrast, desacetyl diltiazem and N-demethyldesacetyl diltiazem are markedly accumulated in individuals expressing a deficient CYP2D6 phenotype. Because these metabolites exhibit pharmacologic properties of possible importance, individual CYP2D6 activity might be an aspect to consider in the clinical use of diltiazem.
