# A novel intronic mutation, 2988G>A, with high predictivity for impaired function of cytochrome P450 2D6 in white subjects.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Sebastian Raimundo, Claudia Toscano, Kathrin Klein, Joachim Fischer, Ernst-Ulrich Griese, Michel Eichelbaum, Matthias Schwab, Ulrich M Zanger
**Journal:** Clinical pharmacology and therapeutics
**Year:** 2004
**PMID:** 15289790

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** Individuals with the cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6 intermediate metabolizer (IM) phenotype have low residual enzyme activity and compose about 10% to 15% of white populations. Their identification is clinically relevant but remains unsatisfactory because of incomplete characterization of the major allele involved, termed CYP2D6*41 (-1584C, R296C, S486T).

**METHODS:** To search for novel mutations, resequencing of the entire CYP2D6 gene was performed in selected individuals. Genotype-phenotype correlation analysis was done in a population sample of 308 white subjects phenotyped with sparteine and previously genotyped for all major alleles.

**RESULTS:** A total of 16 novel polymorphic positions were identified, of which 7 were located within 2.4 kilobases of previously uncharacterized 2D7-2D6 intergenic sequence and 9 were located within intronic regions. The novel mutation 2988G>A in intron 6 appeared to be specifically associated with the IM phenotype. Further analysis in the population sample demonstrated that 2988G>A was strongly linked to allele *41 but not to any other alleles including *1, *2, *2xN, *4, *6, *7, *8, *9, *10, and *35. The overall frequency of the novel polymorphism was 8.4% in the normal white population. Compared with conventionally determined *41, 2988G>A was shown to have improved predictivity for the IM phenotype. With 2988G>A being taken into account, alleles *1, *2, and *35 (-1584G, V11M, R296C, S486T) were found to be phenotypically equivalent.

**CONCLUSIONS:** CYP2D6 genotyping can be considerably simplified by using 2988G>A as a marker for *41 and by omitting genotyping for the functionally equivalent alleles *2 and *35.
