# Association of the HLA-B alleles with carbamazepine-induced Stevens–Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis in the Javanese and Sundanese population of Indonesia: the important role of the HLA-B75 serotype

## Metadata
**Authors:** Rika Yuliwulandari, Erna Kristin, Kinasih Prayuni, Qomariyah Sachrowardi, Franciscus D Suyatna, Sri Linuwih Menaldi, Nuanjun Wichukchinda, Surakameth Mahasirimongkol, Larisa H Cavallari
**Journal:** Pharmacogenomics
**Date:** 2017 Oct 20
**DOI:** [10.2217/pgs-2017-0103](https://doi.org/10.2217/pgs-2017-0103)
**PMID:** 29053440
**PMCID:** PMC5753619
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5753619/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5753619/pdf/pgs-18-1643.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5753619/pdf/pgs-18-1643.pdf)

## Abstract

Carbamazepine (CBZ) is a common cause of life-threatening cutaneous adverse drug reactions such as Stevens–Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN). Previous studies have reported a strong association between the HLA genotype and CBZ-induced SJS/TEN. We investigated the association between the HLA genotype and CBZ-induced SJS/TEN in Javanese and Sundanese patients in Indonesia. Nine unrelated patients with CBZ-induced SJS/TEN and 236 healthy Javanese and Sundanese controls were genotyped for HLA-B and their allele frequencies were compared. The HLA-B*15:02 allele was found in 66.7% of the patients with CBZ-induced SJS/TEN, but only in 29.4% of tolerant control (p = 0.029; odds ratio [OR]: 6.5; 95% CI: 1.2–33.57) and 22.9% of healthy controls (p = 0.0021; OR: 6.78; 95% CI: 1.96–23.38). These findings support the involvement of HLA-B*15:02 in CBZ-induced SJS/TEN reported in other Asian populations. Interestingly, we also observed the presence of the HLA-B*15:21 allele. HLA-B*15:02 and HLA-B*15:21 are members of the HLA-B75 serotype, for which a greater frequency was observed in CBZ-induced SJS/TEN (vs tolerant control [p = 0.0078; OR: 12; 95% CI: 1.90–75.72] and vs normal control [p = 0.0018; OR: 8.56; 95% CI: 1.83–40]). Our findings suggest that screening for the HLA-B75 serotype can predict the risk of CBZ-induced SJS/TEN more accurately than screening for a specific allele.

Keywords: : carbamazepine, HLA-B75, Indonesia, Javanese, Stevens–Johnson syndrome, Sundanese, toxic epidermal necrolysis

## Materials & methods

Genetic samples from 12 patients of Javanese and Sundanese ethnicity with CBZ-induced SJS/TEN were collected during 2014–2015 from several hospitals on Java Island. Patients were diagnosed according to Roujeau's diagnostics criteria and confirmed by dermatologist based on the clinical morphology of their skin damage [[24](#B24)]. The CBZ-tolerant control group of Javanese or Sundanese ethnicity consisted of 17 patients with epilepsy who did not show any cutaneous reaction 3 months after taking CBZ. Samples from 236 unrelated healthy individuals of Javanese or Sundanese ethnicity in the general population were obtained as part of a previous study [[25](#B25)] and used as normal controls. All subjects were interviewed for ethnic background for three generations back. The genomic DNA for both groups was isolated in the same manner and stored at -20°C until further processing. The study protocols were approved by the Research Ethics Committees of YARSI University, Jakarta, Indonesia and YARSI collaborative hospitals, and all subjects signed informed consent forms.

HLA-B genotypes were determined using a Luminex multianalyte profiling system (xMAP; Luminex, TX, USA) with a WAKFlow HLA typing kit (Wakunaga, Hiroshima, Japan), which is based on polymerase chain reaction-reverse sequence-specific oligonucleotide probes, according to the manufacturer's instructions. The HLA alleles were assigned by analyzing hybridization patterns of the target using WAKFlow HLA typing software (Wakunaga).

HLA-B genotype and HLA-B75 serotype frequencies were compared between patients and controls using X^2^ test. The strength of association was estimated by calculating the odds ratio (OR) and 95% CI. All reported p-values were two-sided, and a value of p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. The HLA-B75 serotype was defined using the IMGT/HLA database nomenclature [[22](#B22)].

## Results

12 patients with CBZ-induced SJS/TEN and 17 tolerant controls were recruited in this study. General population control from previous study was also included in analysis to search for an association between HLA allele and CBZ-induced SJS/TEN. All alleles with frequencies <1% in the general population control groups were classified as B others ([Table 1](#T1)). Most of the subjects were female (53%) and the median age was 34.25 years old (15–59 years old). The presence of *HLA-B*15:02* in CBZ-induced SJS/TEN (8/12; 66.7%) was significantly more than that of the CBZ-tolerant control group (4/17; 29.4%; p = 0.029; OR: 6.5; 95% CI: 1.2–33.57) and than that of normal controls (54/236; 22.9%; p = 0.0021; OR: 6.78; 95% CI: 1.96–23.38), see [Table 1](#T1). The *HLA-B*18:01* allele tended to occur more often in patients, but statistical significance was not reached (33.3% [3/9] in SJS/TEN patients compared with 5.9% in tolerant control and 12.3% in general population controls). *HLA-B*44:03* and *HLA-B*15:21* allele frequencies were also higher in patients, but not statistically significant ([Table 1](#T1)). [Table 2](#T2) shows the association between the HLA-B75 serotype and CBZ-induced SJS/TEN. The presence of HLA-B75 serotype was higher in CBZ-induced SJS/TEN patients (10/12; 83.3%) than in tolerant control (5/17; 29.4%) and general population control (87/236; 36.9%). It was revealed that HLA-B75 allele is significantly associated with CBZ-induced SJS/TEN compared with tolerant control (p = 0.0078; OR: 12; 95% CI: 1.90–75.72) and general population control (p = 0.0018; OR: 8.56; 95% CI: 1.83–40).

### Table 1. . Frequencies of heterogenous alleles of HLA-B loci.

| HLA-B allele | Frequency (%) |  |  | Case with SJS/TEN vs general control |  | Case with SJS/TEN vs tolerant control |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|   | SJS/TEN (n = 12) | General control (n = 236)† | Tolerant control (n = 17) | Odds ratio (95% CI) | p-value | Odds ratio (95% CI) | p-value |
| 07:02 | – | 4 (1.7%) | – | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 07:05 | – | 12 (5.1%) | 2 (11.8%) | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 13:01 | – | 6 (2.5%) | – | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 13:02 | – | 5 (2.1%) | – | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 15:02 | 8 (66.7%) | 54 (22.9%) | 4 (29.4%) | 6.78 (1.96–23.38) | 0.0021 | 6.5 (1.2–33.57) | 0.029 |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 15:12 | – | 6 (2.5%) | – | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 15:13 | – | 51 (21.6%) | 2 (11.8%) | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 15:17 | – | 4 (1.7%) | – | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 15:21 | 2 (16.7%) | 33 (14%) | 1 (5.9%) | 1.24 (0.26–5.89) | 1 | 3.2 (0.26–40.05) | 0.55 |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 15:214 | 1 (8.3%) | – | 1 (5.9%) | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 15:25 | – | 8 (3.4%) | – | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 15:32 | – | 4 (1.7%) | – | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 18:01 | 4 (33.3%) | 29 (12.3%) | 1 (5.9%) | 3.59 (1.02–12.66) | 0.06 | 8 (0.76–83.88) | 0.12 |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 18:02 | – | 8 (3.4%) | 2 (11.8%) | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 18:33 | – | – | 1 (5.9%) | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 27:06 | – | 14 (5.9%) | – | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 35:01 | – | – | 2 (11.8%) | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 35:02 | – | – | 1 (5.9%) | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 35:03 | – | 11 (4.7%) | – | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 35:05 | 1 (8.3%) | 39 (16.5%) | 4 (23.5%) | 0.42 (0.053–3.36) | 0.49 | 0.29 (0.02–3.04) | 0.37 |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 35:32 | 1 (8.3%) | – | – | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 38:02 | – | 25 (10.6%) | – | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 40:01 | – | 17 (7.2%) | 1 (5.9%) | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 40:06 | – | 4 (1.7%) | – | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 44:03 | 3 (25%) | 42 (17.8%) | 5 (29.4%) | 0.46 (0.58–3.68) | 0.7 | 0.8 (0.15–4.26) | 1 |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 44:13 | 1 (8.3%) | – | – | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 51:01 | – | 15 (6.4%) | 2 (11.8%) | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 51:02 | – | 16 (6.8%) | – | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 52:01 | – | 5 (2.1%) | – | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 52:02 | – | – | 2 (11.8%) | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 56:02 | – | 4 (1.7%) | – | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 57:01 | – | 6 (2.5%) | – | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 58:01 | – | 27 (11.4%) | – | – | – | – | – |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| B others | – | 15 (6.4%) | – | – | – | – | – |

Table 1 Caption: †From Javanese and Sundanese General Population [25]. ‘–’ no data available. SJS/TEN: Stevens–Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis.

### Table 2. . HLA-B75 serotype carrier frequency in carbamazepine-induced Stevens–Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis patients and normal controls.

| HLA-B serotype | Frequency (%) |  |  | Case with SJS/TEN vs general control |  | Case with SJS/TEN vs tolerant control |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|   |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|   | SJS/TEN (n = 12) | General control (n = 236) | Tolerant control (n = 17) | Odds ratio (95% CI) | p-value | Odds ratio (95% CI) | p-value |
| B75 | 10 (83.3%) | 87 (36.9%) | 5 (29.4%) | 8.56 (1.83–40) | 0.0018 | 12 (1.90–75.72) | 0.0078 |

Table 2 Caption: SJS/TEN: Stevens–Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis.

## Discussion

We determined the HLA-B genotypes in 12 CBZ-induced SJS/TEN patients, 17 CBZ-tolerant patients and 236 normal controls using a high-resolution DNA typing method. We found that *HLA-B*15:02* was the most frequent allele, and observed a strong association between the *HLA-B*15:02* allele and the risk of CBZ-induced SJS/TEN in Javanese and Sundanese populations. These findings are similar to those of other studies in Asian populations [[2](#B2),[5](#B5),[10–16](#B10)]. However, there are some reported cases of patients who developed CBZ-induced SJS while screening negative for *HLA-B*15:02*. Kaniwa *et al*. [[19](#B19)] reported not detecting *HLA-B*15:02* in Japanese SJS/TEN patients receiving CBZ, instead finding *HLA-B*15:11*, which belongs to the same HLA-B75 serotype. Mehta *et al*. (2009) [[16](#B16)] investigated the association between *HLA-B*15:02* and CBZ-induced SJS in eight Indian patients. While they found that six of the patients did carry *HLA-B*15:02*, one patient was homozygous *HLA-B*15:08*. Tassaneeyakul *et al*. [[26](#B26)] detected *HLA-B*15:21* and *HLA-B*15:11* in a Thai population with CBZ-induced SJS/TEN.

We also identified *HLA-B*15:21* in patients who screened negative for *HLA-B*15:02* but developed SJS/TEN ([Table 1](#T1)). Despite the lack of statistical significance, most likely because of the small patient sample, the finding of *HLA-B*15:21* in our study could indicate possible CBZ-induced SJS/TEN in patients who screen negative for *HLA-B*15:02*, especially in the Javanese and Sundanese ethnicities. This suggests that CBZ-induced SJS/TEN may be serotype-specific. However, in this study, we only detected the *HLA-B*15:02 and HLA-B*15:21* alleles. A recent study from Jaruthamsophon *et al*. [[21](#B21)] reported a positive association between *HLA-B*15:21* and CBZ-induced SJS/TEN in Asian populations.

Interestingly, in this study, we also found *HLA-B*18:01* and *HLA-B*44:03*; both are members of the HLA B44 supertype, the most frequent serotype in our study, and share a peptide-binding specificity [[27](#B27),[28](#B28)]. Sidney *et al*. reported that some peptides derived from hepatitis B and C viruses, HIV and *Plasmodium falciparum* have degenerative B44 supertype-binding capacity [[28](#B28)].

In developing a risk assessment strategy to prevent CBZ-induced SJS/TEN in Indonesia, it would be necessary to take into account the increased likelihood that B75 serotype alleles contribute to the condition. Further work should be conducted to characterize the role of *HLA-B*15:21* in CBZ-induced SJS/TEN, by expanding this study to other populations. Our findings showed that the HLA-B75 serotype was strongly associated with CBZ-induced SJS/TEN, and was a stronger predictor than *HLA-B*15:02* alone. We suggest that Asians with the HLA-B75 serotype should be considered at-risk for CBZ-induced SJS/TEN, and not only individuals carrying the *HLA-B*15:02* allele. Hence, it would be beneficial to develop a diagnostic kit for estimating the risk for CBZ-induced SJS/TEN, especially in Asian populations.

The current study is limited by its small sample size, resulting in a wide CI. Nonetheless, further research is warranted to identify drugs which may induce SJS/TEN, as well as other HLA alleles that can predispose specific populations to SJS/TEN. In conclusion, we have been able to establish an association between the HLA-B75 serotype and CBZ-induced SJS/TEN that is stronger than the well-established association of CBZ-induced SJS/TEN with *HLA-B*15:02*, in Javanese and Sundanese patients in Indonesia. Our study provides primary evidence that the development of public health recommendations and efficient assays for HLA-75 serotype screening would benefit the cohort under consideration.

#### Materials & methods

#### Materials & methods

#### Materials & methods

#### Results

#### Conclusion

## Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank all YARSI collaborative hospitals for their contributions. They would like to thank the Department of Medical Sciences, Ministry of Public Health Thailand for supporting the *HLA-B*15:02* genotyping in this study and T Mushiroda at RIKEN for supplying the reagents for HLA-B genotyping of patients and the control group. They also thank RT Pinzon, S Bahri, IM Noor and R Puspita who supported in sample collection.

## Footnotes

## References

1. Ferrell PBJ, McLeod HL. Carbamazepine, HLA-B*1502 and risk of Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: US FDA recommendations. Pharmacogenomics. 2009;9(10):1543–1546. doi: 10.2217/14622416.9.10.1543.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2217/14622416.9.10.1543) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2586963/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18855540/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics&title=Carbamazepine,%20HLA-B*1502%20and%20risk%20of%20Stevens%E2%80%93Johnson%20syndrome%20and%20toxic%20epidermal%20necrolysis:%20US%20FDA%20recommendations&author=PBJ%20Ferrell&author=HL%20McLeod&volume=9&issue=10&publication_year=2009&pages=1543-1546&pmid=18855540&doi=10.2217/14622416.9.10.1543&)

2. Zhang Y, Wang J, Zhao L-M, Peng W, et al. Strong association between HLA-B*1502 and carbamazepine-induced Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis in mainland Han Chinese patients. Eur. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 2011;67(9):885–887. doi: 10.1007/s00228-011-1009-4.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00228-011-1009-4) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21424386/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur.%20J.%20Clin.%20Pharmacol.&title=Strong%20association%20between%20HLA-B*1502%20and%20carbamazepine-induced%20Stevens%E2%80%93Johnson%20syndrome%20and%20toxic%20epidermal%20necrolysis%20in%20mainland%20Han%20Chinese%20patients&author=Y%20Zhang&author=J%20Wang&author=L-M%20Zhao&author=W%20Peng&volume=67&issue=9&publication_year=2011&pages=885-887&pmid=21424386&doi=10.1007/s00228-011-1009-4&)

3. Porter NC. Principles and practice of stereotactic radiosurgery. In: Chin LS, Regine WF, editors. Trigeminal Neuralgia: Medical Management Perspective. Springer Science + Business Media; NY, USA: 2008. pp. 535–539.  [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Trigeminal%20Neuralgia:%20Medical%20Management%20Perspective&author=NC%20Porter&publication_year=2008&)

4. Hung S, Chung W, Jee S, et al. Genetic susceptibility to carbamazepine-induced cutaneous adverse drug reactions. Pharmacogenet. Genomics. 2006;16(4):297–306. doi: 10.1097/01.fpc.0000199500.46842.4a.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.fpc.0000199500.46842.4a) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16538176/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenet.%20Genomics&title=Genetic%20susceptibility%20to%20carbamazepine-induced%20cutaneous%20adverse%20drug%20reactions&author=S%20Hung&author=W%20Chung&author=S%20Jee&volume=16&issue=4&publication_year=2006&pages=297-306&pmid=16538176&doi=10.1097/01.fpc.0000199500.46842.4a&)

5. He X, Jian L, He X, et al. Association between the HLA-B*15:02 allele and carbamazepine-induced Stevens–Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis in Han individuals of northeastern China. Pharmacol. Reports. 2013;65:1256–1262. doi: 10.1016/s1734-1140(13)71483-x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1734-1140(13)71483-x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24399721/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacol.%20Reports&title=Association%20between%20the%20HLA-B*15:02%20allele%20and%20carbamazepine-induced%20Stevens%E2%80%93Johnson%20syndrome/toxic%20epidermal%20necrolysis%20in%20Han%20individuals%20of%20northeastern%20China&author=X%20He&author=L%20Jian&author=X%20He&volume=65&publication_year=2013&pages=1256-1262&pmid=24399721&doi=10.1016/s1734-1140(13)71483-x&)

6. Kulkantrakorn K, Tassaneeyakul W, Prabmechai N, et al. HLA-B*1502 strongly predicts Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis in thai patients with neuropathic. Pain Pract. 2012;12(3):202–208. doi: 10.1111/j.1533-2500.2011.00479.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1533-2500.2011.00479.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21676164/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pain%20Pract.&title=HLA-B*1502%20strongly%20predicts%20Stevens%E2%80%93Johnson%20syndrome%20and%20toxic%20epidermal%20necrolysis%20in%20thai%20patients%20with%20neuropathic&author=K%20Kulkantrakorn&author=W%20Tassaneeyakul&author=N%20Prabmechai&volume=12&issue=3&publication_year=2012&pages=202-208&pmid=21676164&doi=10.1111/j.1533-2500.2011.00479.x&)

7. Mockenhaupt M. Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: clinical patterns, diagnostic considerations, etiology and therapeutic management. Front. Med. Commun. 2014;33:10–16. doi: 10.12788/j.sder.0058.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.12788/j.sder.0058) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25037254/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front.%20Med.%20Commun.&title=Stevens%E2%80%93Johnson%20syndrome%20and%20toxic%20epidermal%20necrolysis:%20clinical%20patterns,%20diagnostic%20considerations,%20etiology%20and%20therapeutic%20management&author=M%20Mockenhaupt&volume=33&publication_year=2014&pages=10-16&pmid=25037254&doi=10.12788/j.sder.0058&)

8. Chung WH, Hung SI, Hong SH, et al. Medical genetics: a marker for Stevens–Johnson syndrome. Nature. 2004;428(6982):486. doi: 10.1038/428486a.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/428486a) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15057820/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=Medical%20genetics:%20a%20marker%20for%20Stevens%E2%80%93Johnson%20syndrome&author=WH%20Chung&author=SI%20Hung&author=SH%20Hong&volume=428&issue=6982&publication_year=2004&pages=486&pmid=15057820&doi=10.1038/428486a&)

9. Tangamornsuksan W, Chaiyakunapruk N, Somkrua R, Lohitnavy M, Tassaneeyakul W. Relationship between the HLA-B*1502 allele and carbamazepine-induced Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Dermatol. 2013;149:1025–1032. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2013.4114.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamadermatol.2013.4114) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23884208/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=JAMA%20Dermatol.&title=Relationship%20between%20the%20HLA-B*1502%20allele%20and%20carbamazepine-induced%20Stevens%E2%80%93Johnson%20syndrome%20and%20toxic%20epidermal%20necrolysis:%20a%20systematic%20review%20and%20meta-analysis&author=W%20Tangamornsuksan&author=N%20Chaiyakunapruk&author=R%20Somkrua&author=M%20Lohitnavy&author=W%20Tassaneeyakul&volume=149&publication_year=2013&pages=1025-1032&pmid=23884208&doi=10.1001/jamadermatol.2013.4114&)

10. Chang C, Too C, Murad S, Hussein SH. Pharmacology and therapeutics association of HLA-B * 1502 allele with carbamazepine-induced toxic epidermal necrolysis and Stevens–Johnson syndrome in the multiethnic Malaysian population. Int. J. Dermatol. 2011;50:221–224. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-4632.2010.04745.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-4632.2010.04745.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21244392/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Dermatol.&title=Pharmacology%20and%20therapeutics%20association%20of%20HLA-B%20*%201502%20allele%20with%20carbamazepine-induced%20toxic%20epidermal%20necrolysis%20and%20Stevens%E2%80%93Johnson%20syndrome%20in%20the%20multiethnic%20Malaysian%20population&author=C%20Chang&author=C%20Too&author=S%20Murad&author=SH%20Hussein&volume=50&publication_year=2011&pages=221-224&pmid=21244392&doi=10.1111/j.1365-4632.2010.04745.x&)

11. Dong D, Sung C, Finkelstein A. Cost–effectiveness of HLA-B*1502 genotyping in adult patients with newly diagnosed epilepsy in Singapore. Neurology. 2012;79:1259–1267. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31826aac73.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e31826aac73) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22955130/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neurology&title=Cost%E2%80%93effectiveness%20of%20HLA-B*1502%20genotyping%20in%20adult%20patients%20with%20newly%20diagnosed%20epilepsy%20in%20Singapore&author=D%20Dong&author=C%20Sung&author=A%20Finkelstein&volume=79&publication_year=2012&pages=1259-1267&pmid=22955130&doi=10.1212/WNL.0b013e31826aac73&)

12. Man CBL, Kwan P, Baum L, et al. Association between HLA-B*1502 allele and antiepileptic drug-induced cutaneous reactions in Han Chinese. Epilepsia. 2007;48(5):1015–1018. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2007.01022.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1528-1167.2007.01022.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17509004/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Epilepsia&title=Association%20between%20HLA-B*1502%20allele%20and%20antiepileptic%20drug-induced%20cutaneous%20reactions%20in%20Han%20Chinese&author=CBL%20Man&author=P%20Kwan&author=L%20Baum&volume=48&issue=5&publication_year=2007&pages=1015-1018&pmid=17509004&doi=10.1111/j.1528-1167.2007.01022.x&)

13. Locharernkul C, Loplumlert J, Limotai C, et al. Carbamazepine and phenytoin-induced Stevens–Johnson syndrome is associated with HLA-B*1502 allele in Thai population. Epilepsia. 2008;49(12):2087–2091. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2008.01719.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1528-1167.2008.01719.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18637831/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Epilepsia&title=Carbamazepine%20and%20phenytoin-induced%20Stevens%E2%80%93Johnson%20syndrome%20is%20associated%20with%20HLA-B*1502%20allele%20in%20Thai%20population&author=C%20Locharernkul&author=J%20Loplumlert&author=C%20Limotai&volume=49&issue=12&publication_year=2008&pages=2087-2091&pmid=18637831&doi=10.1111/j.1528-1167.2008.01719.x&)

14. Sun D, Yu C, Liu Z, et al. Association of HLA-B*1502 and *1511 allele with antiepileptic drug-induced Stevens–Johnson syndrome in central China. J. Huazhong Univ. Sci. Technol. 2014;34(1):146–150. doi: 10.1007/s11596-014-1247-7.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11596-014-1247-7) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24496695/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Huazhong%20Univ.%20Sci.%20Technol.&title=Association%20of%20HLA-B*1502%20and%20*1511%20allele%20with%20antiepileptic%20drug-induced%20Stevens%E2%80%93Johnson%20syndrome%20in%20central%20China&author=D%20Sun&author=C%20Yu&author=Z%20Liu&volume=34&issue=1&publication_year=2014&pages=146-150&pmid=24496695&doi=10.1007/s11596-014-1247-7&)

15. Chen P, Lin J-J, Lu C-S, et al. Carbamazepine-induced toxic effects and HLA-B*1502 screening in taiwan. N. Engl. J. Med. 2011;364:1126–1133. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1009717.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1009717) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21428768/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N.%20Engl.%20J.%20Med.&title=Carbamazepine-induced%20toxic%20effects%20and%20HLA-B*1502%20screening%20in%20taiwan&author=P%20Chen&author=J-J%20Lin&author=C-S%20Lu&volume=364&publication_year=2011&pages=1126-1133&pmid=21428768&doi=10.1056/NEJMoa1009717&)

16. Mehta TY, Prajapati LM, Mittal B, et al. Association of HLA-B*1502 allele and carbamazepine-induced Stevens–Johnson syndrome among Indians. Indian J. Dermatol. Venereol Leprol. 2009;75(6):579–582. doi: 10.4103/0378-6323.57718.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.4103/0378-6323.57718) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19915237/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Indian%20J.%20Dermatol.%20Venereol%20Leprol.&title=Association%20of%20HLA-B*1502%20allele%20and%20carbamazepine-induced%20Stevens%E2%80%93Johnson%20syndrome%20among%20Indians&author=TY%20Mehta&author=LM%20Prajapati&author=B%20Mittal&volume=75&issue=6&publication_year=2009&pages=579-582&pmid=19915237&doi=10.4103/0378-6323.57718&)

17. Lonjou C, Thomas L, Borot N, et al. A marker for Stevens–Johnson syndrome…: ethnicity matters. Pharmacogenomics J. 2006;6:265–268. doi: 10.1038/sj.tpj.6500356.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.tpj.6500356) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16415921/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics%20J.&title=A%20marker%20for%20Stevens%E2%80%93Johnson%20syndrome%E2%80%A6:%20ethnicity%20matters&author=C%20Lonjou&author=L%20Thomas&author=N%20Borot&volume=6&publication_year=2006&pages=265-268&pmid=16415921&doi=10.1038/sj.tpj.6500356&)

18. Kaniwa N, Saito Y, Aihara M, et al. HLA-B locus in Japanese patients with antiepileptics and allopurinol-related Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis. Pharmacogenomics. 2008;9:1617–1622. doi: 10.2217/14622416.9.11.1617.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2217/14622416.9.11.1617) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19018717/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenomics&title=HLA-B%20locus%20in%20Japanese%20patients%20with%20antiepileptics%20and%20allopurinol-related%20Stevens%E2%80%93Johnson%20syndrome%20and%20toxic%20epidermal%20necrolysis&author=N%20Kaniwa&author=Y%20Saito&author=M%20Aihara&volume=9&publication_year=2008&pages=1617-1622&pmid=19018717&doi=10.2217/14622416.9.11.1617&)

19. Kaniwa N, Saito Y, Aihara M, et al. HLA-B*1511 is a risk factor for carbamazepine-induced Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis in Japanese patients. Epilepsia. 2010;51(12):2461–2465. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2010.02766.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1528-1167.2010.02766.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21204807/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Epilepsia&title=HLA-B*1511%20is%20a%20risk%20factor%20for%20carbamazepine-induced%20Stevens%E2%80%93Johnson%20syndrome%20and%20toxic%20epidermal%20necrolysis%20in%20Japanese%20patients&author=N%20Kaniwa&author=Y%20Saito&author=M%20Aihara&volume=51&issue=12&publication_year=2010&pages=2461-2465&pmid=21204807&doi=10.1111/j.1528-1167.2010.02766.x&)

20. Gunathilake KMD, Wettasinghe KT, Dissanayake VHW. A study of HLA-B*15:02 in a Sri Lankan population: implications for pharmacogenomic testing. Hum. Immunol. 2016;77:429–431. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2016.04.001.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humimm.2016.04.001) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27060780/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hum.%20Immunol.&title=A%20study%20of%20HLA-B*15:02%20in%20a%20Sri%20Lankan%20population:%20implications%20for%20pharmacogenomic%20testing&author=KMD%20Gunathilake&author=KT%20Wettasinghe&author=VHW%20Dissanayake&volume=77&publication_year=2016&pages=429-431&pmid=27060780&doi=10.1016/j.humimm.2016.04.001&)

21. Jaruthamsophon K, Tipmanee V, Sangiemchoey A, Sukasem C, Limprasert P. HLA-B*15:21 and carbamazepine-induced Stevens–Johnson syndrome: pooled-data and in silico analysis. Sci. Rep. 2017;7:45553. doi: 10.1038/srep45553.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/srep45553) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC5372085/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28358139/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sci.%20Rep.&title=HLA-B*15:21%20and%20carbamazepine-induced%20Stevens%E2%80%93Johnson%20syndrome:%20pooled-data%20and%20in%20silico%20analysis&author=K%20Jaruthamsophon&author=V%20Tipmanee&author=A%20Sangiemchoey&author=C%20Sukasem&author=P%20Limprasert&volume=7&publication_year=2017&pages=45553&pmid=28358139&doi=10.1038/srep45553&)

22. Marsh SGE, Albert ED, Bodmer WF, et al. Nomenclature for factors of the HLA system, 2010. Tissue Antigens. 2010;75(4):291–455. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.2010.01466.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-0039.2010.01466.x) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2848993/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20356336/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Tissue%20Antigens&title=Nomenclature%20for%20factors%20of%20the%20HLA%20system,%202010&author=SGE%20Marsh&author=ED%20Albert&author=WF%20Bodmer&volume=75&issue=4&publication_year=2010&pages=291-455&pmid=20356336&doi=10.1111/j.1399-0039.2010.01466.x&)

23. Yuliwulandari R, Kashiwase K, Nakajima H, et al. Polymorphisms of HLA genes in western Javanese (Indonesia): close affinities to Southeast–Asian populations. Tissue Antigens. 2009;73(1):46–53. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.2008.01178.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-0039.2008.01178.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19140832/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Tissue%20Antigens&title=Polymorphisms%20of%20HLA%20genes%20in%20western%20Javanese%20(Indonesia):%20close%20affinities%20to%20Southeast%E2%80%93Asian%20populations&author=R%20Yuliwulandari&author=K%20Kashiwase&author=H%20Nakajima&volume=73&issue=1&publication_year=2009&pages=46-53&pmid=19140832&doi=10.1111/j.1399-0039.2008.01178.x&)

24. Roujeau JC. The spectrum of SJS/TEN: a clinical classification. J. Invest. Dermatol. 1994;102:28S–30S. doi: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12388434.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/1523-1747.ep12388434) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8006430/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Invest.%20Dermatol.&title=The%20spectrum%20of%20SJS/TEN:%20a%20clinical%20classification&author=JC%20Roujeau&volume=102&publication_year=1994&pages=28S-30S&pmid=8006430&doi=10.1111/1523-1747.ep12388434&)

25. Yuliwulandari R, Sachrowardi Q, Nakajima H, et al. Association of HLA-A, -B and -DRB1 with pulmonary tuberculosis in western Javanese Indonesia. Hum. Immunol. 2010;71(7):697–701. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2010.04.005.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humimm.2010.04.005) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20438789/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hum.%20Immunol.&title=Association%20of%20HLA-A,%20-B%20and%20-DRB1%20with%20pulmonary%20tuberculosis%20in%20western%20Javanese%20Indonesia&author=R%20Yuliwulandari&author=Q%20Sachrowardi&author=H%20Nakajima&volume=71&issue=7&publication_year=2010&pages=697-701&pmid=20438789&doi=10.1016/j.humimm.2010.04.005&)

26. Tassaneeyakul W, Tiamkao S, Jantararoungtong T, et al. Association between HLA-B*1502 and carbamazepine-induced severe cutaneous adverse drug reactions in a Thai population. Epilepsia. 2010;51(5):926–930. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2010.02533.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1528-1167.2010.02533.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20345939/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Epilepsia&title=Association%20between%20HLA-B*1502%20and%20carbamazepine-induced%20severe%20cutaneous%20adverse%20drug%20reactions%20in%20a%20Thai%20population&author=W%20Tassaneeyakul&author=S%20Tiamkao&author=T%20Jantararoungtong&volume=51&issue=5&publication_year=2010&pages=926-930&pmid=20345939&doi=10.1111/j.1528-1167.2010.02533.x&)

27. Rist MJ, Theodossis A, Croft NP, et al. HLA peptide length preferences control CD8+ T-cell responses. J. Immunol. 2013;191:561–571. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300292.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1300292) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23749632/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Immunol.&title=HLA%20peptide%20length%20preferences%20control%20CD8+%20T-cell%20responses&author=MJ%20Rist&author=A%20Theodossis&author=NP%20Croft&volume=191&publication_year=2013&pages=561-571&pmid=23749632&doi=10.4049/jimmunol.1300292&)

28. Sidney J, Southwood S, Pasquetto V, Sette A. Simultaneous prediction of binding capacity for multiple molecules of the HLA B44 supertype. J. Immunol. 2003;171:5964–5974. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.171.11.5964.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.171.11.5964) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14634108/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Immunol.&title=Simultaneous%20prediction%20of%20binding%20capacity%20for%20multiple%20molecules%20of%20the%20HLA%20B44%20supertype&author=J%20Sidney&author=S%20Southwood&author=V%20Pasquetto&author=A%20Sette&volume=171&publication_year=2003&pages=5964-5974&pmid=14634108&doi=10.4049/jimmunol.171.11.5964&)
