# Comparison of 

## Metadata
**Authors:** Dmitrij Alekseevitch Sychev, Grigorij Nikolaevich Shuev, Salavat Shejhovich Suleymanov, Kristina Anatol'evna Ryzhikova, Karin Badavievich Mirzaev, Elena Anatol'evna Grishina, Natalia Evgenievna Snalina, Zhannet Alimovna Sozaeva, Anton Mikhailovich Grabuzdov, Irina Andreevna Matsneva
**Journal:** Pharmacogenomics and personalized medicine
**Year:** 2017
**PMID:** 28435307

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** The efficiency and safety of drug therapy depends on the peculiarities of functioning of the P450 cytochrome group and transporting proteins. There are significant differences for single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) frequency.

**MATERIALS AND METHODS:** We studied the peculiarities of P450 cytochrome polymorphisms, SLCO1B1 transporting protein, and P-glycoprotein carriage in healthy volunteers in the Nanai ethnic group living in Russia, and compared them to the carriage of SNPs in the Russian population according to literature data.

**RESULTS:** After performing the real-time polymerase chain reactions on the samples from 70 healthy volunteers from the Nanai group, for the CYP2C9*2C430T polymorphism we determined 70 CC-genotype carriers. As for the CYP2C9*3A1075C polymorphism, we found 62 AA-genotype carriers and eight AC-genotype carriers. For the CYP2C19*2G681A polymorphism, we determined 39 GG-genotype carriers and 28 GA-genotype carriers, for the CYP2C19*3G636A polymorphism 58 GG-genotype carriers and 12 GA-genotype carriers, and for the CYP2C19*17C806T polymorphism 67 CC-genotype carriers and three CT-genotype carriers. For the CYP2D6*4G1846A polymorphism, the GG genotype had 68 carriers, and the GA genotype two carriers. For the ABCB1*6C3435T polymorphism, there were 19 CC-genotype carriers and 39 CT-genotype carriers. For the SLCO1B1*5T521C polymorphism, the TT genotype had 41 carriers and the CT genotype 25 carriers. The distribution of genotypes fitted the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for all the polymorphisms, except those of CYP2C9*2. There were also significant differences in allele frequencies for some polymorphisms between the Nanais and the Russians.

**CONCLUSION:** In the Nanai population, there are polymorphisms connected with the decrease in safety and efficiency of drug therapy. Studying the ethnic differences might influence the determination of priority in the introduction of pharmacogenetic tests in clinical practice in different regions of Russia.
