# Effect of 24 cytochrome P450 2D6 variants found in the Chinese population on the N-demethylation of amitriptyline in vitro.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Qinghua Weng, Bingqing Liang, Yali Zhou, Xiangyu Li, Hao Wang, Yunyun Zhan, Dapeng Dai, JianPing Cai, Guoxin Hu
**Journal:** Pharmaceutical biology
**Year:** 2016
**PMID:** 27097346

## Abstract

**CONTEXT:** Amitriptyline (AT), one of the tricyclic antidepressants, is still widely used for the treatment of the depression and control of anxiety states and panic disorders in the developing countries.

**OBJECTIVE:** This study evaluates the catalytic activities of CYP2D6*1, CYP2D6*2, CYP2D6*10 and 22 novel alleles in Han Chinese population and their effects on the N-demethylation of AT in vitro.

**MATERIALS AND METHODS:** CYP2D6*1 and 24 CYP2D6 allelic variants were highly expressed in insect cells, and all variants were characterized using AT as a substrate. Reactions were performed at 37 °C with 10-1000 μM substrate for 30 min. We established a HPLC method to quantify the levels of nortriptyline (NT). The kinetic parameters Km, Vmax and intrinsic clearance (Vmax/Km) of NT were calculated.

**RESULTS:** Among the 24 CYP2D6 variants, all variants exhibited decreased intrinsic clearance values compared with wild-type CYP2D6.1. Kinetic parameters of two CYP2D6 variants (CYP2D6*92, *96) could not be determined because of absent enzyme activities.

**CONCLUSIONS:** The comprehensive in vitro assessment of CYP2D6 variants provides significant insight into allele-specific activity towards AT in vivo.
