# Correlation of CYP2D6 allelic polymorphism to outcome of acute coronary syndrome in mid-Euphrates Iraqi patients on metoprolol therapy.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Asma A Swadi, Bassim I Mohammad, Najah R Hadi, Hayder A Al-Aubaidy
**Journal:** Gene
**Year:** 2019
**PMID:** 30965129

## Abstract

This study aims to investigate the different clinically relevant allele variants (allele frequencies) of CYP2D6 gene and to determine whether a specific genotype of CYP2D6 gene (based on genetic polymorphism "allelic types" and combination) have impact on metoprolol effectiveness (clinical outcome) in patients who have acute coronary syndrome (ACS). The study included 250 patients with ACS who were classified into 2 study groups, 125 patients received metoprolol and served as a study group (Group1) and 125 who received no metoprolol therapy (due to contraindication to the medication) and served as a control group (Group 2). Venous blood samples were taken from all participants for DNA extraction. Urine samples were also collected to assess the metabolic ratio using High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) technique. There was significant variation in the distribution of Iraqi patients with respect to CYP2D6 allelic polymorphism as compared to similar patients in other countries. Besides, this significant difference existed in patients' outcome in terms of morbidity and mortality in respect to variable genotypes and phenotypes. We recommend a dose individualization of metoprolol in patients with ACS is essential to improve patients' outcome.
