# Resequencing array for gene variant detection in malignant hyperthermia and butyrylcholinestherase deficiency.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Soledad Levano, Asensio Gonzalez, Martine Singer, Philippe Demougin, Henrik Rüffert, Albert Urwyler, Thierry Girard
**Journal:** Neuromuscular disorders : NMD
**Year:** 2017
**PMID:** 28259615

## Abstract

Malignant hyperthermia (MH) and butyrylcholinestherase (BCHE) deficiency are two relevant pharmacogenetic disorders in anesthetic practice linked with sequence variants, the former in the RyR1 and CACNA1S genes, the latter in the BCHE gene. Genotyping for known pathogenic variants in these genes is useful to help identify susceptible individuals, and others may exist but remain unknown, because full-length sequence of these genes is, in general, not investigated. To facilitate this task, we developed a resequencing DNA array, the perioperative patient safety (POPS) array, to be able to screen the entire coding sequences of the RyR1, CACNA1S and BCHE genes. MH-susceptible individuals (n = 121) identified with the in vitro contracture test, the standard diagnostic tool for MH susceptibility, were genotyped with the arrays. Compared with capillary sequencing, call rates with the arrays could achieve 100% at maximal sensitivity, although to reduce false positive rates, sensitivity was adjusted to 0.85, 0.87 and 0.66 for RyR1, CACNA1S and BCHE respectively, with overall base call specificity exceeding 99%. Detection of 29 predetermined RyR1 variants in 44 individuals was successful in 97% of the cases, among them all 16 variants of established diagnostic value. In a trial application of the arrays, 21 MH-susceptible subjects with no known RyR1 or CACNA1S variants were screened, resulting in the discovery of new variants, all confirmed by capillary sequencing. In conclusion, arrays offer an efficient high-throughput alternative for diagnostic genotyping of candidate genes affecting MH susceptibility, BCHE deficiency and other neuromuscular disorders, simultaneously enabling a comprehensive search for rare variants in these genes.
