# Sitafloxacin-based third-line rescue regimens for Helicobacter pylori infection in Japan.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Takahisa Furuta, Mitsushige Sugimoto, Chise Kodaira, Masafumi Nishino, Mihoko Yamade, Takahiro Uotani, Shu Sahara, Hitomi Ichikawa, Takanori Yamada, Satoshi Osawa, Ken Sugimoto, Hiroshi Watanabe, Kazuo Umemura
**Journal:** Journal of gastroenterology and hepatology
**Year:** 2014
**PMID:** 24224808

## Abstract

**BACKGROUNDS:** Quinolone-based regimens have been used as the rescue for eradication of Helicobacter pylori. Sitafloxacin is known to have low minimum inhibitory concentration for H. pylori. Here, we compared two sitafloxacin-based eradication regimens as rescue for the eradication of H. pylori.

**METHODS:** We attempted to eradicate H. pylori in 180 Japanese patients who had never failed in eradication of H. pylori with the triple proton pump inhibitor/amoxicillin/clarithromycin therapy (1st line) and the triple proton pump inhibitor/amoxicillin/metronidazole therapy (2nd line). They were assigned to either the triple therapy with rabeprazole 10 mg b.i.d./q.i.d., amoxicillin 500 mg q.i.d, and sitafloxacin 100 mg b.i.d. (RAS) for 1 or 2 weeks or the triple therapy with rabeprazole 10 mg b.i.d./q.i.d., metronidazole 250 mg b.i.d., and sitafloxacin 100 mg b.i.d. (RMS) for 1 or 2 weeks. Eradication was assessed via the (13) C-urea breath test and rapid urease test.

**RESULTS:** Intention-to-treat and per-protocol analyses of eradication rates were 84.1% (37/44) and 86.4% (37/43) with RAS for 1 week, 88.9% (40/45) and 90.9% (40/44) for RAS for 2 weeks, 90.9% (40/44) and 90.9% (40/44) for 1 week-RMS and 87.2% (41/47) and 91.1% (41/45) with RMS for 2 weeks. We noted no statistical significant differences in eradication rates among four regimens.

**CONCLUSION:** All of the above-described rescue regimens proved relatively equally useful in the eradication of H. pylori. Of them, RAS for 2 weeks and RMS for 1 or 2 weeks could attain the rescue eradication rates higher than 90% by per-protocol analysis.
