# Influence of rabeprazole and lansoprazole on the pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus in relation to CYP2C19, CYP3A5 and MDR1 polymorphisms in renal transplant recipients.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Masatomo Miura, Kazuyuki Inoue, Hideaki Kagaya, Shigeru Satoh, Hitoshi Tada, Yoshinori Sagae, Tomonori Habuchi, Toshio Suzuki
**Journal:** Biopharmaceutics & drug disposition
**Year:** 2007
**PMID:** 17377957

## Abstract

The objective of this study was to evaluate whether genetic polymorphisms of CYP2C19, CYP3A5 and MDR1 significantly impact the interaction between tacrolimus and rabeprazole or lansoprazole. Seventy-three recipients were randomly assigned after renal transplantation to receive repeated doses of tacrolimus for 28 days with a regimen of either 20 mg of rabeprazole or 30 mg of lansoprazole. Blood concentrations of tacrolimus were measured by microparticle enzyme immunoassay. The mean daily dose and the dose-adjusted area under the plasma concentration-time curves from 0 to 12 h (AUC(0-12)) of tacrolimus coadministered with rabeprazole or lansoprazole were the lowest and highest, respectively, in CYP2C19 poor metabolizers (PMs) having the CYP3A5*3/*3 genotype (0.084 and 0.112 mg/kg/day and 1.269 and 1.033 ng.h/ml/mg/kg, respectively). On the other hand, the mean dose-adjusted AUC(0-12) of tacrolimus coadministered with rabeprazole or lansoprazole were the highest in CYP2C19 PMs having the MDR13435CC+CT genotype, but not significantly. The present study indicates that there are significant interactions between tacrolimus and rabeprazole or lansoprazole in CYP2C19 PM renal transplant recipients bearing the CYP3A5*3/*3 genotypes. For recipients having these genetic polymorphisms, lower dosages of tacrolimus are required to achieve the target therapeutic index.
