# Detection of cytochrome P450 2C19 gene polymorphism from noninvasive samples by cycling probe technology.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Saori Nakagawa, Naoko Kuwabara, Yu Takamatsu, Sadahiko Shimoeda, Shin Ohta, Susumu Yamato
**Journal:** Annals of clinical biochemistry
**Year:** 2014
**PMID:** 24048716

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** The proportion of poor metabolizers (PMs) of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C19 is much higher in the Japanese population than in European populations. Cycling probe technology (CPT) is a simple signal amplification technique for targeting specific DNA sequences. CPT utilizes a chimeric DNA-RNA-DNA probe that is cleaved by the enzyme ribonuclease (RNase H). In this study, using CPT, we aimed to detect the CYP2C19 gene polymorphism from noninvasive samples to determine extensive metabolizers (EMs) and PMs of CYP2C19.

**METHODS:** DNA samples were extracted from hair, buccal mucosa, and blood cells. Primers and cycling probes were designed specifically for region G636A for exon 4 and G681A for exon 5, reported to be gene polymorphisms of CYP2C19.

**RESULTS:** DNA extracted from hair follicle cells and buccal epithelial cells was the same as that collected from invasive blood sampling. The genotype of CYP2C19 was successfully identified as either EM or PM in 71 samples, producing identical results to those for the TaqMan method, except in three samples.

**CONCLUSIONS:** We successfully detected the two gene polymorphisms of CYP2C19 from noninvasive samples using a simple DNA extraction method and CPT.
