# CYP2C19 genetic polymorphism in Thai, Burmese and Karen populations.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Wichittra Tassaneeyakul, Werawath Mahatthanatrakul, Kanokporn Niwatananun, Kesara Na-Bangchang, Arporn Tawalee, Nathawut Krikreangsak, Utaiwan Cykleng, Wongwiwat Tassaneeyakul
**Journal:** Drug metabolism and pharmacokinetics
**Year:** 2006
**PMID:** 16946555

## Abstract

The genetic polymorphism of CYP2C19 was examined in three Southeast Asian populations. This study was conducted in 774 Thais, 127 Burmeses and 131 Karens. Genomic DNA was extracted from leucocytes and analyzed by the PCR-RFLP technique. Genotype analysis revealed that the allele frequencies of CYP2C19*1, CYP2C19*2 and CYP2C19*3 in the Thais were 0.68, 0.29 and 0.03, respectively, and those of the Burmese population were 0.66, 0.30 and 0.04, respectively. For Karens, the minority ethnic in Mynmar, the allele frequencies of CYP2C19*1, CYP2C19*2 and CYP2C19*3 were 0.71, 0.28 and 0.01, respectively. The prevalence of PM estimated from genotype data among these three ethnic populations were 9.2%, 11.0%, and 8.4%, respectively. The PM phenotype and the frequencies of CYP2C19 defective alleles, particularly CYP2C19*3 among these three Southeast Asian ethnics appeared to be lower than other Asian populations. Lower prevalence of CYP2C19 PM suggests that these ethnics may have different capacity to metabolize drugs that are substrates of CYP2C19. Certain drug dosage regiments should be considered differently for Asian populations.
