# A new genetic defect in human CYP2C19: mutation of the initiation codon is responsible for poor metabolism of S-mephenytoin.

## Metadata
**Authors:** R J Ferguson, S M De Morais, S Benhamou, C Bouchardy, J Blaisdell, G Ibeanu, G R Wilkinson, T C Sarich, J M Wright, P Dayer, J A Goldstein
**Journal:** The Journal of pharmacology and experimental therapeutics
**Year:** 1998
**PMID:** 9435198

## Abstract

The 4'-hydroxylation of the S-enantiomer of the anticonvulsant drug mephenytoin exhibits a genetic polymorphism in humans. This polymorphism shows marked interracial heterogeneity, with the poor metabolizer (PM) phenotype representing 2 to 5% of Caucasian and 13 to 23% of Asian populations. Two defective CYP2C19 alleles, CYP2C19*2 and CYP2C19*3, have been described which account for approximately 87% of Caucasian and > 99% of Oriental PM alleles. The present study identifies a new allele (CYP2C19*4) in Caucasian PMs which contains an A-->G mutation in the initiation codon. A new polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism genotyping test was developed, and the incidence of this allele was examined in a European Caucasian population which had been phenotyped for mephenytoin metabolism. One of nine putative PMs was heterozygous for CYP2C19*2/CYP2C19*4, which suggests that CYP2C19*4 represents a defective allele. Six of the seven remaining putative PMs available for genotyping were explained by CYP2C19*2. The frequency of the CYP2C19*4 allele in Caucasians was 0.6%. An additional Caucasian PM from a separate study was also heterozygous for CYP2C19*2 and CYP2C19*4. To verify that CYP2C19*4 represented a defective CYP2C19 allele, the initiation codon of the normal CYP2C19*1 cDNA was mutated to a GTG, and both cDNAs were expressed in yeast. Recombinant CYP2C19 protein was detected by Western blot analysis of colonies transformed with CYP2C19*1 cDNA, but not in those transformed with CYP2C19*4 cDNA. The two cDNAs were also used in an in vitro coupled transcription/translation assay. CYP2C19 protein was translated only from the CYP2C19*1 allele. These data indicate that CYP2C19*4 represents a new PM allele.
