# Global pharmacogenomics: Impact of population diversity on the distribution of polymorphisms in the CYP2C cluster among Brazilians.

## Metadata
**Authors:** G Suarez-Kurtz, J P Genro, M O de Moraes, E B Ojopi, S D J Pena, J A Perini, A Ribeiro-dos-Santos, M A Romano-Silva, I Santana, C J Struchiner
**Journal:** The pharmacogenomics journal
**Year:** 2012
**PMID:** 21173785

## Abstract

The impact of biogeographical ancestry, self-reported 'race/color' and geographical origin on the frequency distribution of 10 CYP2C functional polymorphisms (CYP2C8*2, *3, *4, CYP2C9*2, *3, *5, *11, CYP2C19*2, *3 and *17) and their haplotypes was assessed in a representative cohort of the Brazilian population (n=1034). TaqMan assays were used for allele discrimination at each CYP2C locus investigated. Individual proportions of European, African and Amerindian biogeographical ancestry were estimated using a panel of insertion-deletion polymorphisms. Multinomial log-linear models were applied to infer the statistical association between the CYP2C alleles and haplotypes (response variables), and biogeographical ancestry, self-reported Color and geographical origin (explanatory variables). The results showed that CYP2C19*3, CYP2C9*5 and CYP2C9*11 were rare alleles (<1%), the frequency of other variants ranged from 3.4% (CYP2C8*4) to 17.3% (CYP2C19*17). Two distinct haplotype blocks were identified: block 1 consists of three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (CYP2C19*17, CYP2C19*2 and CYP2C9*2) and block 2 of six SNPs (CYP2C9*11, CYP2C9*3, CYP2C9*5, CYP2C8*2, CYP2C8*4 and CYP2C8*3). Diplotype analysis generated 41 haplotypes, of which eight had frequencies greater than 1% and together accounted for 96.4% of the overall genetic diversity. The distribution of CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 (but not CYP2C19) alleles, and of CYP2C haplotypes was significantly associated with self-reported Color and with the individual proportions of European and African genetic ancestry, irrespective of Color self-identification. The individual odds of having alleles CYP2C8*2, CYP2C8*3, CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3, and haplotypes including these alleles, varied continuously as the proportion of European ancestry increased. Collectively, these data strongly suggest that the intrinsic heterogeneity of the Brazilian population must be acknowledged in the design and interpretation of pharmacogenomic studies of the CYP2C cluster in order to avoid spurious conclusions based on improper matching of study cohorts. This conclusion extends to other polymorphic pharmacogenes among Brazilians, and most likely to other admixed populations of the Americas.
