# A novel transversion in the intron 5 donor splice junction of CYP2C19 and a sequence polymorphism in exon 3 contribute to the poor metabolizer phenotype for the anticonvulsant drug S-mephenytoin.

## Metadata
**Authors:** G C Ibeanu, J Blaisdell, R J Ferguson, B I Ghanayem, K Brosen, S Benhamou, C Bouchardy, G R Wilkinson, P Dayer, J A Goldstein
**Journal:** The Journal of pharmacology and experimental therapeutics
**Year:** 1999
**PMID:** 10411572

## Abstract

Cytochrome P-450 (CYP) 2C19 is responsible for the metabolism of a number of therapeutic agents such as S-mephenytoin, omeprazole, proguanil, certain barbiturates, diazepam, propranolol, citalopram and imipramine. Genetic polymorphisms in this enzyme are responsible for the poor metabolizers (PM) of mephenytoin, which represent approximately 13-23% of Asians and 3-5% of Caucasians. Several polymorphisms contribute to this phenotype. We have isolated two new allelic variants that contribute to the PM phenotype in Caucasians. CYP2C19*7 contained a single T --> A nucleotide transversion in the invariant GT at the 5' donor splice site of intron 5. The second PM allele, CYP2C19*8, consisted of a T358C nucleotide transition in exon 3 that results in a Trp120Arg substitution. In a bacterial expression system, CYP2C198 protein exhibited a dramatic (approximately 90% and 70%) reduction in the metabolism of S-mephenytoin and tolbutamide, respectively, when compared with the wild-type CYP2C191B protein. Restriction fragment length polymerase chain reaction tests were developed to identify the new allelic variants.
