# CYP2C19 polymorphisms and coronary heart disease risk factors synergistically impact clopidogrel response variety after percutaneous coronary intervention.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Tao Liu, Tao Yin, Yan Li, Li-Qiang Song, Jin Yu, Rui Si, Ying-Mei Zhang, Yuan He, Wen-Yi Guo, Hai-Chang Wang
**Journal:** Coronary artery disease
**Year:** 2014
**PMID:** 24608794

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** Platelet inhibition by clopidogrel is highly variable and the elevated platelet activity will increase the risk of major adverse cardiovascular events after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). CYP2C19 loss-of-function (LOF) alleles and risk factors of coronary heart disease (CAD) were reported to be associated with the low response of clopidogrel.

**PURPOSE:** This study was carried out to analyze the contributions of CYP2C19 polymorphisms and risk factors to the various clopidogrel responses in Chinese patients with stable CAD after PCI.

**MATERIALS AND METHODS:** The platelet reactivity index (PRI) was measured in 145 patients who underwent PCI using the vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein assay. Gene chip hybrid tests were used to analyze the genetic polymorphisms of CYP2C19.

**RESULTS:** With a cutoff value of 50% in PRI, 20.67% (31/145) of the patients were defined to be clopidogrel resistant. With respect to the normal *1, *2, and *3 LOF CYP2C19 alleles, patients were classified into three metabolism phenotypes: 39.31% were extensive, 47.59% were intermediate, and 13.10% were poor metabolizers (PMs). Of the enrolled patients, 53.82 and 9.66%, respectively, were carriers of *2 and *3 alleles. There was a significant difference in PRI between PM and either extensive or intermediate metabolizers (P<0.05). In all, 36.84% of the patients with the PM phenotype were clopidogrel resistant. Carriers of two CYP2C19 LOF alleles, BMI, and the presence of type 2 diabetes were three independent risk factors for clopidogrel resistance.

**CONCLUSION:** Genetic CYP2C19 polymorphisms and CAD risk factors - type 2 diabetes mellitus and BMI - synergistically affect the antiplatelet activity of clopidogrel and the occurrence of major adverse cardiovascular events after PCI.
