# Effects of various factors on steady-state plasma concentrations of risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone: lack of impact of MDR-1 genotypes

## Metadata
**Authors:** Norio Yasui-Furukori, Kazuo Mihara, Takenori Takahata, Akihito Suzuki, Taku Nakagami, Ronald De Vries, Tomonori Tateishi, Tsuyoshi Kondo, Sunao Kaneko
**Journal:** British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology
**Date:** 2004 May
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2125.2003.02061.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2125.2003.02061.x)
**PMID:** 15089809
**PMCID:** PMC1884506
**URL:** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1884506/
**PDF:** [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1884506/pdf/bcp0057-0569.pdf](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1884506/pdf/bcp0057-0569.pdf)

## Abstract

**Aims:** 
An in vitro study has suggested that risperidone is a substrate of P-glycoprotein, which is coded by MDR-1 gene. Thus, we studied the effects of major polymorphisms of the MDR-1 gene on plasma drug concentrations.

**Methods:** 
Subjects were 85 schizophrenic patients receiving 3 mg twice daily of risperidone. Sample collections were conducted 12 h after the bedtime dosing. Plasma concentrations of risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone were quantified using LC/MS/MS. MDR-1 genotypes (C3435T and G2677T/A) and CYP2D6 genotypes were identified using PCR-RFLP methods.

**Results:** 
There was no difference in geometric mean (95% CI) of steady-state plasma concentration of risperidone between C3435T genotypes [C/C, C/T, T/T; 2.06 (1.63, 6.47), 2.96 (3.10, 7.91), 2.28 (1.81, 8.04) ng ml−1, P = 0.759] or G2677T/A genotypes [G/G, G/T or A, T or A/T or A; 1.62 (0.08, 6.07), 2.64 (3.25, 7.10), 2.71 (2.77, 8.72) ng ml−1, P = 0.625] or 9-hydroxyrisperidone between C3435T genotypes [38.3 (33.7, 50.1), 34.9 (32.9, 42.0), 35.7 (31.7, 42.3) ng ml−1, P = 0.715] or G2677T/A genotypes [40.6 (33.0, 51.8), 35.0 (33.3, 42.4), 36.1 (32.8, 47.2) ng ml−1, P = 0.601]. Multiple regression analyses including CYP2D6 genotypes, sex, and age revealed that steady-state plasma concentration of risperidone correlated with the number of mutated alleles for CYP2D6 (standardized partial correlation coefficients (beta) = 0.540, P < 0.001) and those of 9-hydroxyrisperidone (standardized beta = 0.244, P = 0.038) and active moiety (standardized beta = 0.257, P = 0.027) correlated with age.

**Conclusions:** 
These findings suggest that the MDR-1 variants are not associated with steady-state plasma concentration of risperidone or 9-hydroxyrisperidone, but CYP2D6 genotypes and age are determinants of these concentrations.

Keywords: age, CYP2D6, 9-hydroxyrisperidone, MDR-1, risperidone

### Aims

An *in vitro* study has suggested that risperidone is a substrate of P-glycoprotein, which is coded by *MDR-1* gene. Thus, we studied the effects of major polymorphisms of the *MDR-1* gene on plasma drug concentrations.

### Methods

Subjects were 85 schizophrenic patients receiving 3 mg twice daily of risperidone. Sample collections were conducted 12 h after the bedtime dosing. Plasma concentrations of risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone were quantified using LC/MS/MS. *MDR-1* genotypes (*C3435T* and *G2677T/A*) and CYP2D6 genotypes were identified using PCR-RFLP methods.

### Results

There was no difference in geometric mean (95% CI) of steady-state plasma concentration of risperidone between *C3435T* genotypes [*C/C*, *C/T, T/T*; 2.06 (1.63, 6.47), 2.96 (3.10, 7.91), 2.28 (1.81, 8.04) ng ml^−1^, *P* = 0.759] or *G2677T/A* genotypes [*G/G*, *G/T* or *A*, *T* or *A/T* or *A*; 1.62 (0.08, 6.07), 2.64 (3.25, 7.10), 2.71 (2.77, 8.72) ng ml^−1^, *P* = 0.625] or 9-hydroxyrisperidone between *C3435T* genotypes [38.3 (33.7, 50.1), 34.9 (32.9, 42.0), 35.7 (31.7, 42.3) ng ml^−1^, *P* = 0.715] or *G2677T/A* genotypes [40.6 (33.0, 51.8), 35.0 (33.3, 42.4), 36.1 (32.8, 47.2) ng ml^−1^, *P* = 0.601]. Multiple regression analyses including *CYP2D6* genotypes, sex, and age revealed that steady-state plasma concentration of risperidone correlated with the number of mutated alleles for *CYP2D6* (standardized partial correlation coefficients (beta) = 0.540, *P* < 0.001) and those of 9-hydroxyrisperidone (standardized beta = 0.244, *P* = 0.038) and active moiety (standardized beta = 0.257, *P* = 0.027) correlated with age.

### Conclusions

These findings suggest that the MDR-1 variants are not associated with steady-state plasma concentration of risperidone or 9-hydroxyrisperidone, but *CYP2D6* genotypes and age are determinants of these concentrations.

## Introduction

Risperidone is one of the representative atypical antipsychotic drugs and has potent antagonistic properties for serotonin 5-HT_2_ and dopamine D_2_ receptors [[1](#b1), [2](#b2)]. This drug is characterized by effectiveness against both positive and negative symptoms in the treatment of schizophrenia [[3](#b3)]. Furthermore it produces fewer side-effects, including extrapyramidal side-effects, than conventional antipsychotic drugs [[4](#b4)].

Risperidone mainly undergoes 9-hydroxylation, yielding an active metabolite 9-hydroxyrisperidone, while alicyclic dehydroxylation and oxidative N-dealkylation are the minor metabolic pathways [[5](#b5)]. 9-hydroxyrisperidone is mainly removed through renal excretion, while it undergoes little further hepatic metabolism [[6](#b6)]. Since 9-hydroxyrisperidone has similar pharmacological properties to risperidone, the sum of risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone is regarded to contribute to the overall antipsychotic effects in the treatment of schizophrenia [[7](#b7), [8](#b8)]. At steady state, the majority of the active moiety is ascribable to 9-hydroxyrisperidone in schizophrenic patients who are extensive metabolizers for CYP2D6 [[9](#b9), [10](#b10)], suggesting the clinical importance of this metabolite in the ordinary population.

P-glycoprotein, which is encoded by MDR-1 gene, is involved in the acquisition of multidrug resistance phenotypes not only in cancer cells but also in normal tissues such as brain, kidney, liver and intestine [[11](#b11), [12](#b12)]. Its major physiological role is to serve as a barrier to entry and as an efflux mechanism for xenobiotics and cellular metabolites [[13](#b13)]. It has also suggested that P-glycoprotein may limit intestinal drug absorption to constrain oral drug bioavailability [[14](#b14)]. Hoffmeyer *et al.*[[15](#b15)] suggested that a single-nucleotide polymorphism in exon 26 of the MDR-1 gene (C3435T) was associated with a lower level of intestinal MDR-1 expression. Moreover it has been reported that another single-nucleotide polymorphism in exon 21 of the MDR-1 gene (G2677T/A) is also linked with a lower function of P-glycoprotein [[16](#b16)].

Recently, an *in vitro* study has shown that quetiapine and risperidone have stronger affinity to P-glycoprotein than other atypical antipsychotic drugs, suggesting that quetiapine and risperidone are substrates of P-glycoprotein [[17](#b17)]. However, there are no *in vivo* data indicating that quetiapine or risperidone as a substrate of P-glycoprotein is of clinically relevance. Therefore, we studied the effects of *MDR-1* genotypes on plasma concentrations of risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone in schizophrenia. Furthermore, various other factors including CYP2D6 genotypes and age were examined using multiple regression analysis.

## Methods

### Subjects

The subjects were 85 schizophrenic Japanese inpatients (25 males and 60 females) who fulfilled the criteria for schizophrenia according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition. Some of the patients participated in our previous studies on the relationship between steady-state plasma drug concentrations and *CYP2D6* genotype [[18](#b18), [19](#b19)]. The mean ± SD (range) of age, body weight and duration of illness were 45.4 ± 14.8 (18–75) years, 59.1 ± 11.6 (37–105) kg and 175 ± 135 (4–448) months, respectively. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Hirosaki University Hospital, and written informed consent to participate in this study was obtained from the patients and their families.

### Protocol

The subjects had received risperidone 3 mg twice a day (08.00 h and 20.00 h) for 4–68 weeks. The elimination half-lives of risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone were reported to be 3–20 h and 20–29 h, respectively [[5](#b5)]. Therefore, plasma concentrations of these compounds had already reached steady state in all of the subjects before initiating the study. The drugs co-administered were flunitrazepam 1–6 mg day^−1^ in 56 cases, biperiden 4–6 mg day^−1^ in 37 cases, sennoside 12–60 mg day^−1^ in 28 cases, trihexyphenidyl 4–10 mg day^−1^ in 15 cases, diazepam 2–30 mg day^−1^ in 10 cases, lorazepam 1–3 mg day^−1^ in 8 cases and alprazolam 0.8–2.4 mg day^−1^ in 7 cases.

### Assays for risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone

Plasma concentrations of risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone were measured using a liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry-mass spectrometry (LC-MS-MS) method. Extraction procedure was as follows: 200 µl of 0.1 m phosphate buffer (pH 7), 50 µl of internal standard solution (R068808: Jansen Research Foundation) and 100 µl of methanol were added to 200 µl of plasma sample. Thereafter, 400 µl of 0.1 m borax was added. The mixture was vortexed and poured over an Extrelut NT 1 (Merck) column, which was eluted with 7 ml of ethyl acetate. The eluate was evaporated under a nitrogen stream at 65°C, and was redissolved in 100 µl of methanol which was again evaporated under a nitrogen stream at 65°C. The residues were redissolved in 200 µl of acetonitrile : 0.01 m ammonium acetate (50 : 50, pH 9.0), and 5 µl were injected onto the LC-MS-MS system. The system consisted of API 3000 (Sciex) and a column (Hypersil BDS C18 100 ′ 4.6, 3 µm). The mobile phase was gradient ammonium acetate (0.01 m, pH 9.0)-acetonitrile. Among the fragment ions of the compounds, the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 207.0 for risperidone, m/z 191.0 for 9-hydroxyrisperidone, and m/z 201.0 for the internal standard, were selected for ion monitoring. The lower limit of detection was 0.1 ng ml^−1^ for risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone, and the values of the intra-assay and inter-assay coefficients of variation were less than 5% at all the concentrations (0.1–100 ng ml^−1^) of calibration curves for both compounds.

### Analyses for MDR-1 and CYP2D6 genotypes

For the determination of *MDR-1* and *CYP2D6* genotype, DNA was isolated from peripheral leucocytes by a guanidium isothiocyanate method. The *C3435T* and *G2677T/A* alleles were detected by PCR-RFLP methods as described by Tanabe *et al.*[[20](#b20)]. The *CYP2D6***1 (***1)*, *CYP2D6***3* and *CYP2D6***4* alleles were identified by allele specific PCR analysis according to Heim & Meyer [[21](#b21)]. A long-PCR analysis was used to detect the *CYP2D6***5 (***5)* allele [[22](#b22)]. The *CYP2D6***10 (***10)* allele was identified as the C188T mutation using a two-step PCR analysis as described by Johansson *et al.*[[23](#b23)]. The *CYP2D6***14 (***14)* allele was identified as the G1846T/A mutation using a two-step PCR analysis as by Kubota *et al.*[[24](#b24)]. The *CYP2D6***2* does not result in decreased CYP2D6 activity. Therefore, the *CYP2D6***2* was regarded as the wild type (wt) allele, together with the *CYP2D6***1*.

### Data analyses

Steady-state plasma concentrations of risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone were adjusted by drug concentration × body weight/median of body weight (58 kg) in sample population. Active moiety concentration was calculated from the sum of risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone concentrations.

Haplotype analysis was restricted to *C3435T* and *G2677T/A* on the basis of linkage disequilibrium observed between both positions. To obtain a large difference in P-glycoprotein activity, specific genotypes were assigned to simple haplotype pairs, i.e. homozygous wild type allele at both positions, heterozygous at both positions, homozygous mutated alleles at both positions.

The comparison of the plasma drug concentrations and each *MDR-1* genotype was performed with use of one-way anova. Multiple regression analyses were used to detect correlation between plasma drug concentrations and several factors including *MDR-1* genotypes (*C3435T* and *G2677T/A*), *CYP2D6* genotype, age and gender. The number of mutated allele was used as independent variables and gender difference was analyzed using dummy variables (male = 0, female = 1). A *P* value of 0.05 or less was regarded as significant. SPSS 7.5.1 for Windows SPSS Japan Inc., Tokyo, was used for these statistical analyses.

## Results

The patients had the following *MDR-1* genotypes: *C/C* (23 cases), *C/T* (41) and *T/T* (21) for *C3435T* and *G/G* (10), *G/T* or *A* (44) and *T* or *A/T* or *A* (31) for *G2677T/A*, respectively. There was no difference in body weight, gender distribution or age between *C3435T* genotype or between *G2677T/A* genotype.

No difference was found in geometric means (95% confidence intervals) of steady-state plasma concentration of risperidone between *C3435T* genotypes [*C/C*, *C/T, T/T*; 2.06 (1.63, 6.47), 2.96 (3.10, 7.91), 2.28 (1.81, 8.04) ng ml^−1^, *F* = 0.276, d.f. = 2,82, *P* = 0.759] or *G2677T/A* genotypes [*G/G*, *G/T* or *A*, *T* or *A/T* or *A*; 1.62 (0.08, 6.07), 2.64 (3.25, 7.10), 2.71 (2.77, 8.72) ng ml^−1^, *F* = 0.337, d.f. = 2,82, *P* = 0.715]. The steady-state plasma concentration of 9-hydroxyrisperidone did not differ between *C3435T* genotypes [38.3 (33.7, 50.1), 34.9 (32.9, 42.0), 35.7 (31.7, 42.3) ng ml^−1^, *F* = 0.473, d.f. = 2,82, *P* = 0.625] or *G2677T/A* genotypes [40.6 (33.0, 51.8), 35.0 (33.3, 42.4), 36.1 (32.8, 47.2) ng ml^−1^, *F* = 0.255, d.f. = 2,82, *P* = 0.775]. There was no difference in active moiety concentration between *C3435T* genotypes or between *G2677T/A* genotypes ([Table 1](#tbl1)).

### Table 1.

| Genotype | n | Risperidone (ng ml−1) | 9-hydroxyrisperidone (ng ml−1) | Active moiety (ng ml−1) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| C3435T |  |  |  |  |
| C/C | 23 | 2.06 (1.63, 6.47) | 38.3 (33.7, 50.1) | 41.8 (36.8, 55.0) |
| C/T | 44 | 2.96 (3.10, 7.91) | 34.9 (32.9, 42.0) | 39.8 (37.4, 48.5) |
| T/T | 21 | 2.28 (1.81, 8.04) | 35.7 (31.7, 42.3) | 40.2 (35.6, 53.2) |
| Significance |   | 0.759 | 0.625 | 0.842 |
| G2677T/A |  |  |  |  |
| G/G | 10 | 1.62 (0.08, 6.07) | 40.6 (33.0, 51.8) | 43.1 (33.6, 57.7) |
| G/T, A | 44 | 2.64 (3.25, 7.10) | 35.0 (33.3, 42.4) | 39.4 (37.4, 48.6) |
| T, A/T, A | 31 | 2.71 (2.77, 8.72) | 36.1 (32.8, 47.2) | 41.0 (37.6, 52.8) |
| Significance |   | 0.715 | 0.601 | 0.775 |
| Haplotype |  |  |  |  |
| C/C and G/G | 8 | 1.68 (-0.36, 7.88) | 43.3 (34.2, 57.8) | 46.0 (34.3, 65.6) |
| C/T and G/T, A | 26 | 2.88 (2.64, 7.90) | 35.7 (32.5, 44.6) | 40.0 (36.1, 51.6) |
| T/T and T, A/T, A | 14 | 1.88 (1.23, 6.21) | 36.5 (31.0, 49.1) | 49.5 (33.5, 54.0) |
| Significance |   | 0.686 | 0.461 | 0.691 |

Table 1 Caption: Steady-state plasma concentrations of risperidone, 9-hydroxyrisperidone and active moiety between C3435T and G2677T/A genotypes and their haplotypes

Haplotype pattern of *C3435T* and between *G2677T/A* genotypes was as follows: *C/C* and *G/G* in eight cases, *C/T* and *G/T* or *A* in 26 cases, and *T/T* and *T* or *A/T* or *A* in 14 cases. Other cases were excluded from analyses. No difference was found in plasma concentrations of risperidone (*F =* 0.379, d.f. = 2,45, *P* = 0.686), 9-hydroxyrisperidone (*F =* 0.787, d.f. = 2,45, *P* = 0.461) or active moiety between these three groups (*F =* 0.372, d.f. = 2,45, *P* = 0.691) ([Table 1](#tbl1)).

The patients had the following CYP2D6 genotypes: *wt/wt* (37 patients), **10/wt* (30), **5/wt* (9), **10/***10* (5), **5/***10* (3) and **4/***14* (1), respectively. A patients with **4/***14* was regarded as a poor metabolizer. These patients were divided into three groups according to the number of mutated alleles; no mutated allele in 37, one mutated allele in 39 and two mutated alleles in nine patients. Multiple regression analyses including *C3435T* and *G2677T/A* allele for *MDR-1*, *CYP2D6* genotypes, gender difference and age showed that the steady-state plasma concentration of risperidone correlated with the number of mutated alleles for *CYP2D6* (standardized partial correlation coefficients (beta) = 0.539, *P* < 0.001) and that plasma concentration of 9-hydroxyrisperidone (standardized beta = 0.244, *P* = 0.038) and active moiety (standardized beta = 0.257, P = 0.027) correlated with age ([Table 2](#tbl2)).

### Table 2.

|   | Standardized partial correlation coefficient |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Variables | Risperidone | 9-hydroxyrisperidone | Active moiety |
| MDR-1 genotypes |  |  |  |
| C3435T | 0.004 | –0.017 | –0.013 |
| G2677T/A | 0.023 | –0.013 | –0.003 |
| CYP2D6 genotypes | 0.540*** | –0.083 | 0.122 |
| Age | 0.121 | 0.244* | 0.257* |
| Gender | 0.022 | –0.102 | –0.081 |
| Multiple correlation coefficient | 0.573*** | 0.253 | 0.302 |

Table 2 Caption: Standardized partial correlation coefficients and multiple correlation coefficients between plasma drug concentrations and various factors in 85 schizophrenic patients receiving risperidone

## Discussion

P-glycoprotein is found in the epithelial cells lining the luminal surface of many organs often associated with an excretory or barrier function, that is, the hepatic bile canalicular membrane, renal proximal tubule, villus-tip enterocyte in the small intestine, and the endothelial cells making up the blood-brain and blood–testes barriers [[11](#b11), [12](#b12), [14](#b14), [25](#b25)]. Recently, a polymorphism in exon 26 (C3435T) of this gene was shown to correlate with intestinal P-glycoprotein expression and function in humans. Carriers homozygous for this polymorphism (TT) showed more than two-fold lower P-glycoprotein expression and higher digoxin plasma concentrations compared with the CC group [[15](#b15)]. However, the role of P-glycoprotein in pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics has not yet been fully proven in psychiatric field.

A recent *in vitro* study has examined the activity of P-glycoprotein towards four atypical and two conventional antipsychotics and a proven substrate, verapamil, by their P-glycoprotein ATPase activity, a putative measure of P-glycoprotein affinity [[17](#b17)]. The Michaelis-Menten equation was applied to the data. The rank order of the ratio *V*_max_/*K*_m_ was: verapamil (2.6) > quetiapine (1.7) > risperidone (1.4) > olanzapine (0.8) > chlorpromzaine (0.7) > haloperidol (0.3) = clozapine (0.3). The atypical antipsychotics quetiapine and risperidone were relatively good P-glycoprotein substrates, although their affinities were not as high as verapamil. These results suggest that P-glycoprotein is likely to influence absorption in the small intestine and/or excretion in liver or kidney of all atypical antipsychotics to various degrees. Therefore, we assumed that MDR-1 genotypes would have some impact on the pharmacokinetics of risperidone even at steady state.

Contrary to our expectation, the steady-state plasma concentration of risperidone was not different between *MRD-1* genotypes. It appears that *MDR-1* variants were not associated with the steady-state plasma concentration of risperidone. We have some plausible explanations for these negative findings. First, when *MDR-1* variants alter the activity of P-glycoprotein in the small intestine, which limits oral bioavailability, peak concentrations of risperidone may differ between *MDR-1* genotypes. However, plasma concentrations of risperidone were monitored at 12 h after the dosing in the present study. Therefore, any difference in peak plasma concentration of risperidone caused by *MDR-1* variants was offset by large interindividual variability in risperidone metabolism during the elimination phase. Second, since a previous study suggesting low contribution of renal excretion (4%) to overall drug elimination [[5](#b5)], the contribution of biotransformation of risperidone to risperidone disposition might be much larger than that of the excretion via P-glycoprotein in liver or kidney.

9-hydroxyrisperidone is mainly removed through renal excretion [[6](#b6)]. P-glycoprotein exists in the renal proximal tubule [[25](#b25)]. Thus, it is more likely that the steady-state plasma concentration of 9-hydroxyrisperidone depends upon P-glycoprotein activity. However, no change was found between the *MDR-1* genotypes in this study. This finding suggests either that 9-hydroxyrisperidone is not such a specific substrate of P-glycoprotein or that renal excretion of the compound may be mediated by other transporters. Likewise, the *MRD-1* variants were not associated with the active moiety concentration. This is a reasonable finding in the light of lack of association between the MDR-1 variants and the steady-state plasma concentration of 9-hydroxyrisperidone. Active moiety concentration is predominantly influenced by the steady-state plasma concentration of 9-hydroxyrisperidone because the steady-state plasma concentration of 9-hydroxyrisperidone was much higher than that of risperidone in this study. Therefore, we concluded that it is unlikely that *MRD-1* variants have clinical implications based on changes in plasma drug concentrations.

In the present study, multiple regression analyses showed strong correlation between the number of mutated alleles for *CYP2D6* and steady-state plasma concentration of risperidone. This finding is in accordance to previous studies [[10](#b10), [18](#b18), [19](#b19), [26](#b26)]. Several *in vitro* studies demonstrating that 9-hydroxylation is mainly catalyzed by CYP2D6 also support the results of this study [[27](#b27), [28](#b28)]. Furthermore, the steady-state plasma concentration of 9-hydroxyrisperidone or active moiety concentration was not correlated with number of mutated alleles for *CYP2D6*, which is also in line with previous findings [[10](#b10), [18](#b18), [19](#b19), [26](#b26)]. Although it is still unknown whether elimination of 9-hydroxyrisperidone is mediated in liver, this finding may be explained some possibility that further metabolism of 9-hydroxyrisperidone is catalyzed by CYP2D6, to some extent. From a clinical point of view, active moiety concentration is more important when investigating the relationship between clinical outcomes and pharmacokinetics. From this perspective, it is unlikely that *CYP2D6* variants have clinical implications based on changes in the plasma concentration of risperidone.

A significant correlation was found between the steady-state plasma concentration of 9-hydroxyrisperidone and age. This is a new finding, but it is not surprising because renal function tends to decrease with advancing of age. The active moiety concentration also correlated with age. Although there have been no data indicating clear association between clinical effect of risperidone and plasma drug concentration, a recent study suggested that the higher plasma concentration of active moiety tends to have a higher rate of extrapyramidal symptoms [[29](#b29), [30](#b30)]. Therefore, careful dose setting and possibly therapeutic drug monitoring is needed in elderly patients.

In conclusion, the present study suggests that *MDR-1* genotypes are unlikely to affect steady-state plasma concentration of risperidone or 9-hydroxyrisperidone. However *CYP2D6* genotypes and age are determinants affecting risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone, respectively. Particularly careful administration is necessary in elderly patients because the active moiety concentration depends on age.

## Acknowledgments

This study was supported by Grant-in-Aids from the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports and Technology (#15790612), a grant from the Pharmacological Research Foundation (Tokyo) and a grant from the Hirosaki Research Institute for Neurosciences.

## References

1. Jansen PAJ, Niemegeers CJE, Awouters F, Schellekens KHL, Megens AAHP, Meert TF. Pharmacology of risperidone (R 64 766), a new antipsychotic with serotonin–S2 and dopamine–D2 antagonistic properties. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1988;244:685–93.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2450200/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Pharmacol%20Exp%20Ther&title=Pharmacology%20of%20risperidone%20(R%2064%20766),%20a%20new%20antipsychotic%20with%20serotonin%E2%80%93S2%20and%20dopamine%E2%80%93D2%20antagonistic%20properties&author=PAJ%20Jansen&author=CJE%20Niemegeers&author=F%20Awouters&author=KHL%20Schellekens&author=AAHP%20Megens&volume=244&publication_year=1988&pages=685-93&pmid=2450200&)

2. Leysen JE, Gommeren W, Eeens A, de Chaffoy de Courcelles D, Stoof JC, Jansen PAJ. Biochemical profile of risperidone, a new antipsychotic. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1998;247:661–70.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2460616/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Pharmacol%20Exp%20Ther&title=Biochemical%20profile%20of%20risperidone,%20a%20new%20antipsychotic&author=JE%20Leysen&author=W%20Gommeren&author=A%20Eeens&author=D%20de%20Chaffoy%20de%20Courcelles&author=JC%20Stoof&volume=247&publication_year=1998&pages=661-70&pmid=2460616&)

3. Claus A, Bollen J, De Cuyper H, Eneman M, Malfroid M, Peuskens J, Heylen S. Risperidone versus haloperidol in the treatment of chronic schizophrenic inpatients: a multicenter double-blind comparative study. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 1992;85:295–305. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0447.1992.tb01473.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0447.1992.tb01473.x) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1375801/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Acta%20Psychiatr%20Scand&title=Risperidone%20versus%20haloperidol%20in%20the%20treatment%20of%20chronic%20schizophrenic%20inpatients:%20a%20multicenter%20double-blind%20comparative%20study&author=A%20Claus&author=J%20Bollen&author=H%20De%20Cuyper&author=M%20Eneman&author=M%20Malfroid&volume=85&publication_year=1992&pages=295-305&pmid=1375801&doi=10.1111/j.1600-0447.1992.tb01473.x&)

4. Chouinard G, Jones B, Remington G, Bloom D, Addington D, Macewan GW, Labelle A, Beauclair L, Arnott W. A Canadian multicenter placebo-controlled study of fixed doses of risperidone and haloperidol in the treatment of chronic schizophrenic patients. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 1993;13:25–40.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7683702/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Psychopharmacol&title=A%20Canadian%20multicenter%20placebo-controlled%20study%20of%20fixed%20doses%20of%20risperidone%20and%20haloperidol%20in%20the%20treatment%20of%20chronic%20schizophrenic%20patients&author=G%20Chouinard&author=B%20Jones&author=G%20Remington&author=D%20Bloom&author=D%20Addington&volume=13&publication_year=1993&pages=25-40&pmid=7683702&)

5. Mannens G, Huang ML, Meuldermans W, Hendrickx J, Woestenborghs R, Heykants J. Absorption, metabolism, and excretion of risperidone in humans. Drug Metab Dispos. 1993;21:1134–41.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7507814/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Drug%20Metab%20Dispos&title=Absorption,%20metabolism,%20and%20excretion%20of%20risperidone%20in%20humans&author=G%20Mannens&author=ML%20Huang&author=W%20Meuldermans&author=J%20Hendrickx&author=R%20Woestenborghs&volume=21&publication_year=1993&pages=1134-41&pmid=7507814&)

6. Snoeck E, Van Peer A, Sack M, Horton M, Mannens G, Woestenborghs R, Meibach R, Heykants J. Influence of age, renal and liver impairment on the pharmacokinetics of risperidone in man. Psychopharmacology. 1995;122:223–9. doi: 10.1007/BF02246543.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02246543) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8748391/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Psychopharmacology&title=Influence%20of%20age,%20renal%20and%20liver%20impairment%20on%20the%20pharmacokinetics%20of%20risperidone%20in%20man&author=E%20Snoeck&author=A%20Van%20Peer&author=M%20Sack&author=M%20Horton&author=G%20Mannens&volume=122&publication_year=1995&pages=223-9&pmid=8748391&doi=10.1007/BF02246543&)

7. Van Beijsterveldt L, Geerts R, Leysen J, Megens A, Van den Eynde H, Meuldermans W, Heykants J. The regional brain distribution of risperidone and its active metabolite 9-hydroxyrisperidone in the rat. Psychopharmacol. 1993;114:53–62. doi: 10.1007/BF02245444.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02245444) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7531352/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Psychopharmacol&title=The%20regional%20brain%20distribution%20of%20risperidone%20and%20its%20active%20metabolite%209-hydroxyrisperidone%20in%20the%20rat&author=L%20Van%20Beijsterveldt&author=R%20Geerts&author=J%20Leysen&author=A%20Megens&author=H%20Van%20den%20Eynde&volume=114&publication_year=1993&pages=53-62&pmid=7531352&doi=10.1007/BF02245444&)

8. Huang ML, Van Peer A, Woestenborghs R, De Coster R, Heykants J, Jansen AAI, Zylicz Z, Visscher HW, Jonkman JHG. Pharmacokinetics of the novel antipsychotic agent risperidone and the prolactin response in healthy subjects. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1993;54:257–68. doi: 10.1038/clpt.1993.146.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/clpt.1993.146) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7690693/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Pharmacol%20Ther&title=Pharmacokinetics%20of%20the%20novel%20antipsychotic%20agent%20risperidone%20and%20the%20prolactin%20response%20in%20healthy%20subjects&author=ML%20Huang&author=A%20Van%20Peer&author=R%20Woestenborghs&author=R%20De%20Coster&author=J%20Heykants&volume=54&publication_year=1993&pages=257-68&pmid=7690693&doi=10.1038/clpt.1993.146&)

9. Olesen OV, Licht RW, Thomsen E, Bruun T, Viftrup JE, Linnet K. Serum concentrations and side effects in psychiatric patients during risperidone therapy. Ther Drug Monit. 1998;20:380–4. doi: 10.1097/00007691-199808000-00004.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/00007691-199808000-00004) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9712460/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ther%20Drug%20Monit&title=Serum%20concentrations%20and%20side%20effects%20in%20psychiatric%20patients%20during%20risperidone%20therapy&author=OV%20Olesen&author=RW%20Licht&author=E%20Thomsen&author=T%20Bruun&author=JE%20Viftrup&volume=20&publication_year=1998&pages=380-4&pmid=9712460&doi=10.1097/00007691-199808000-00004&)

10. Scordo MG, Spina E, Facciolà G, Avenoso A, Johansson I, Dahl ML. Cytochrome P450 2D6 genotype and steady state plasma levels of risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone. Psychopharmacology. 1999;147:300–5. doi: 10.1007/s002130051171.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s002130051171) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10639689/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Psychopharmacology&title=Cytochrome%20P450%202D6%20genotype%20and%20steady%20state%20plasma%20levels%20of%20risperidone%20and%209-hydroxyrisperidone&author=MG%20Scordo&author=E%20Spina&author=G%20Facciol%C3%A0&author=A%20Avenoso&author=I%20Johansson&volume=147&publication_year=1999&pages=300-5&pmid=10639689&doi=10.1007/s002130051171&)

11. Thiebaut F, Tsuruo T, Hamada H, Gottesman MM, Pastan I, Willingham MC. Cellular localization of the multidrug-resistance gene product P-glycoprotein in normal human tissues. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1987;84:7735–8. doi: 10.1073/pnas.84.21.7735.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.84.21.7735) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC299375/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2444983/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&title=Cellular%20localization%20of%20the%20multidrug-resistance%20gene%20product%20P-glycoprotein%20in%20normal%20human%20tissues&author=F%20Thiebaut&author=T%20Tsuruo&author=H%20Hamada&author=MM%20Gottesman&author=I%20Pastan&volume=84&publication_year=1987&pages=7735-8&pmid=2444983&doi=10.1073/pnas.84.21.7735&)

12. Cordon-Cardo C, O'Brien JP, Casals D, Rittman-Grauer L, Biedler JL, Melamed MR, Bertino JR. Multidrug-resistance gene (P-glycoprotein) is expressed by endothelial cells at blood–brain barrier sites. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1989;86:695–8. doi: 10.1073/pnas.86.2.695.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.86.2.695) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC286540/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2563168/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&title=Multidrug-resistance%20gene%20(P-glycoprotein)%20is%20expressed%20by%20endothelial%20cells%20at%20blood%E2%80%93brain%20barrier%20sites&author=C%20Cordon-Cardo&author=JP%20O'Brien&author=D%20Casals&author=L%20Rittman-Grauer&author=JL%20Biedler&volume=86&publication_year=1989&pages=695-8&pmid=2563168&doi=10.1073/pnas.86.2.695&)

13. Ambudkar SV, Dey S, Hrycyna CA, Ramachandra M, Pastan I, Gottesman MM. Biochemical, cellular, and pharmacological aspects of the multidrug transporter. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 1999;39:361–98. doi: 10.1146/annurev.pharmtox.39.1.361.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.pharmtox.39.1.361) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10331089/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Annu%20Rev%20Pharmacol%20Toxicol&title=Biochemical,%20cellular,%20and%20pharmacological%20aspects%20of%20the%20multidrug%20transporter&author=SV%20Ambudkar&author=S%20Dey&author=CA%20Hrycyna&author=M%20Ramachandra&author=I%20Pastan&volume=39&publication_year=1999&pages=361-98&pmid=10331089&doi=10.1146/annurev.pharmtox.39.1.361&)

14. Benet LZ, Izumi T, Zhang Y, Silverman JA, Wacher VJ. Intestinal MDR transport proteins and P−450 enzymes as barriers to oral drug delivery. Control Release. 1999;62:25–31. doi: 10.1016/s0168-3659(99)00034-6.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0168-3659(99)00034-6) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10518631/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Control%20Release&title=Intestinal%20MDR%20transport%20proteins%20and%20P%E2%88%92450%20enzymes%20as%20barriers%20to%20oral%20drug%20delivery&author=LZ%20Benet&author=T%20Izumi&author=Y%20Zhang&author=JA%20Silverman&author=VJ%20Wacher&volume=62&publication_year=1999&pages=25-31&pmid=10518631&doi=10.1016/s0168-3659(99)00034-6&)

15. Hoffmeyer S, Burk O, von Richter O, Arnold HP, Brockmoller J, Johne A, Cascorbi I, Gerloff T, Roots I, Eichelbaum M, Brinkmann U. Functional polymorphisms of the human multidrug-resistance gene. multiple sequence variations and correlation of one allele with P-glycoprotein expression and activity in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2000;97:3473–8. doi: 10.1073/pnas.050585397.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.050585397) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC16264/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10716719/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&title=Functional%20polymorphisms%20of%20the%20human%20multidrug-resistance%20gene.%20multiple%20sequence%20variations%20and%20correlation%20of%20one%20allele%20with%20P-glycoprotein%20expression%20and%20activity%20in%20vivo&author=S%20Hoffmeyer&author=O%20Burk&author=O%20von%20Richter&author=HP%20Arnold&author=J%20Brockmoller&volume=97&publication_year=2000&pages=3473-8&pmid=10716719&doi=10.1073/pnas.050585397&)

16. Siegmund W, Ludwig K, Giessmann T, Dazert P, Schroeder E, Sperker B, Warzok R, Kroemer HK, Cascorbi I. The effects of the human MDR1 genotype on the expression of duodenal P-glycoprotein and disposition of the probe drug talinolol. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2002;72:572–83. doi: 10.1067/mcp.2002.127739.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1067/mcp.2002.127739) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12426521/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Pharmacol%20Ther&title=The%20effects%20of%20the%20human%20MDR1%20genotype%20on%20the%20expression%20of%20duodenal%20P-glycoprotein%20and%20disposition%20of%20the%20probe%20drug%20talinolol&author=W%20Siegmund&author=K%20Ludwig&author=T%20Giessmann&author=P%20Dazert&author=E%20Schroeder&volume=72&publication_year=2002&pages=572-83&pmid=12426521&doi=10.1067/mcp.2002.127739&)

17. Boulton DW, DeVane CL, Liston HL, Markowitz JS. In vitro P-glycoprotein affinity for atypical and conventional antipsychotics. Life Sci. 2002;71:163–9. doi: 10.1016/s0024-3205(02)01680-6.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0024-3205(02)01680-6) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12031686/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Life%20Sci&title=In%20vitro%20P-glycoprotein%20affinity%20for%20atypical%20and%20conventional%20antipsychotics&author=DW%20Boulton&author=CL%20DeVane&author=HL%20Liston&author=JS%20Markowitz&volume=71&publication_year=2002&pages=163-9&pmid=12031686&doi=10.1016/s0024-3205(02)01680-6&)

18. Yasui-Furukori N, Mihara K, Kondo T, Kubota T, Iga T, Takarada Y, De Vries R, Kaneko S, Tateishi T. Effects of CYP2D6 genotypes on plasma concentrations of risperidone and enantiomers of 9-hydroxyrisperidone in Japanese patients with schizophrenia. J Clin Pharmacol. 2003;43:122–7. doi: 10.1177/0091270002239819.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1177/0091270002239819) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12616663/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Pharmacol&title=Effects%20of%20CYP2D6%20genotypes%20on%20plasma%20concentrations%20of%20risperidone%20and%20enantiomers%20of%209-hydroxyrisperidone%20in%20Japanese%20patients%20with%20schizophrenia&author=N%20Yasui-Furukori&author=K%20Mihara&author=T%20Kondo&author=T%20Kubota&author=T%20Iga&volume=43&publication_year=2003&pages=122-7&pmid=12616663&doi=10.1177/0091270002239819&)

19. Mihara K, Kondo T, Yasui-Furukori N, Suzuki A, Ishida M, Ono S, Kubota T, Iga T, Takarada Y, de Vries R, Kaneko S. Effects of various CYP2D6 genotypes on the steady-state plasma concentrations of risperidone and its active metabolite, 9-hydroxyrisperidone, in Japanese patients with schizophrenia. Ther Drug Monit. 2003;25:287–93. doi: 10.1097/00007691-200306000-00006.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/00007691-200306000-00006) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12766554/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ther%20Drug%20Monit&title=Effects%20of%20various%20CYP2D6%20genotypes%20on%20the%20steady-state%20plasma%20concentrations%20of%20risperidone%20and%20its%20active%20metabolite,%209-hydroxyrisperidone,%20in%20Japanese%20patients%20with%20schizophrenia&author=K%20Mihara&author=T%20Kondo&author=N%20Yasui-Furukori&author=A%20Suzuki&author=M%20Ishida&volume=25&publication_year=2003&pages=287-93&pmid=12766554&doi=10.1097/00007691-200306000-00006&)

20. Tanabe M, Ieiri I, Nagata N, Inoue K, Ito S, Kanamori Y, Takahashi M, Kurata Y, Kigawa J, Higuchi S, Terakawa N, Otsubo K. Expression of P-glycoprotein in human placenta: relation to genetic polymorphism of the multidrug resistance (MDR) -1 gene. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2001;297:1137–43.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11356939/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Pharmacol%20Exp%20Ther&title=Expression%20of%20P-glycoprotein%20in%20human%20placenta:%20relation%20to%20genetic%20polymorphism%20of%20the%20multidrug%20resistance%20(MDR)%20-1%20gene&author=M%20Tanabe&author=I%20Ieiri&author=N%20Nagata&author=K%20Inoue&author=S%20Ito&volume=297&publication_year=2001&pages=1137-43&pmid=11356939&)

21. Heim M, Meyer UA. Genotyping of poor metabolizers of debrisoquine by allele-specific PCR amplification. Lancet. 1990;336:529–32. doi: 10.1016/0140-6736(90)92086-w.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0140-6736(90)92086-w) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1975039/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Lancet&title=Genotyping%20of%20poor%20metabolizers%20of%20debrisoquine%20by%20allele-specific%20PCR%20amplification&author=M%20Heim&author=UA%20Meyer&volume=336&publication_year=1990&pages=529-32&pmid=1975039&doi=10.1016/0140-6736(90)92086-w&)

22. Steen VM, Andreassen OA, Daly AK, Tefre T, Børresen AL, Idle JR, Gulbrandsen AK. Detection of the poor metabolizer-associated CYP2D6 (D) gene deletion allele by long-PCR technology. Pharmacogenetics. 1995;5:215–23. doi: 10.1097/00008571-199508000-00005.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/00008571-199508000-00005) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8528268/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenetics&title=Detection%20of%20the%20poor%20metabolizer-associated%20CYP2D6%20(D)%20gene%20deletion%20allele%20by%20long-PCR%20technology&author=VM%20Steen&author=OA%20Andreassen&author=AK%20Daly&author=T%20Tefre&author=AL%20B%C3%B8rresen&volume=5&publication_year=1995&pages=215-23&pmid=8528268&doi=10.1097/00008571-199508000-00005&)

23. Johansson I, Oscarson M, Yue QY, Bertilsson L, Sjöqvist F, Ingelman-Sundberg M. Genetic analysis of the Chinese cytochrome P450D locus: characterization of variant CYP2D6 genes present in subjects with diminished capacity for debrisoquine hydroxylation. Mol Pharmacol. 1994;46:452–9.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7935325/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Pharmacol&title=Genetic%20analysis%20of%20the%20Chinese%20cytochrome%20P450D%20locus:%20characterization%20of%20variant%20CYP2D6%20genes%20present%20in%20subjects%20with%20diminished%20capacity%20for%20debrisoquine%20hydroxylation&author=I%20Johansson&author=M%20Oscarson&author=QY%20Yue&author=L%20Bertilsson&author=F%20Sj%C3%B6qvist&volume=46&publication_year=1994&pages=452-9&pmid=7935325&)

24. Kubota T, Yamaura Y, Ohkawa N, Hara H, Chiba K. Frequencies of CYP2D6 mutant alleles in a normal Japanese population and metabolic activity of dextromethorphan O-demethylation in different CYP2D6 genotypes. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2000;50:31–4. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2125.2000.00209.x.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2125.2000.00209.x) | [PMC free article](/articles/PMC2014971/) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10886115/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Br%20J%20Clin%20Pharmacol&title=Frequencies%20of%20CYP2D6%20mutant%20alleles%20in%20a%20normal%20Japanese%20population%20and%20metabolic%20activity%20of%20dextromethorphan%20O-demethylation%20in%20different%20CYP2D6%20genotypes&author=T%20Kubota&author=Y%20Yamaura&author=N%20Ohkawa&author=H%20Hara&author=K%20Chiba&volume=50&publication_year=2000&pages=31-4&pmid=10886115&doi=10.1046/j.1365-2125.2000.00209.x&)

25. Matheny CJ, Lamb MW, Brouwer KR, Pollack GM. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic implications of P-glycoprotein modulation. Pharmacotherapy. 2001;21:778–96. doi: 10.1592/phco.21.9.778.34558.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1592/phco.21.9.778.34558) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11444575/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacotherapy&title=Pharmacokinetic%20and%20pharmacodynamic%20implications%20of%20P-glycoprotein%20modulation&author=CJ%20Matheny&author=MW%20Lamb&author=KR%20Brouwer&author=GM%20Pollack&volume=21&publication_year=2001&pages=778-96&pmid=11444575&doi=10.1592/phco.21.9.778.34558&)

26. Roh HK, Kim CE, Chung WG, Park CS, Svensson JO, Bertilsson L. Risperidone metabolism in relation to CYP2D6*10 allele in Korean schizophrenic patients. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2001;57:671–5. doi: 10.1007/s002280100372.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s002280100372) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11791898/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur%20J%20Clin%20Pharmacol&title=Risperidone%20metabolism%20in%20relation%20to%20CYP2D6*10%20allele%20in%20Korean%20schizophrenic%20patients&author=HK%20Roh&author=CE%20Kim&author=WG%20Chung&author=CS%20Park&author=JO%20Svensson&volume=57&publication_year=2001&pages=671-5&pmid=11791898&doi=10.1007/s002280100372&)

27. Fang J, Bourin M, Baker GB. Metabolism of risperidone to 9-hydroxyrisperidone by human cytochromes P450 2D6 and 3A4. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1999;359:147–51. doi: 10.1007/pl00005334.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/pl00005334) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10048600/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Naunyn%20Schmiedebergs%20Arch%20Pharmacol&title=Metabolism%20of%20risperidone%20to%209-hydroxyrisperidone%20by%20human%20cytochromes%20P450%202D6%20and%203A4&author=J%20Fang&author=M%20Bourin&author=GB%20Baker&volume=359&publication_year=1999&pages=147-51&pmid=10048600&doi=10.1007/pl00005334&)

28. Yasui-Furukori N, Hidestrand M, Spina E, Facciola G, Scordo MG, Tybring G. Different enantioselective 9-hydroxylation of risperidone by the two human CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 enzymes. Drug Metab Dispos. 2001;29:1263–8.  [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11560868/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Drug%20Metab%20Dispos&title=Different%20enantioselective%209-hydroxylation%20of%20risperidone%20by%20the%20two%20human%20CYP2D6%20and%20CYP3A4%20enzymes&author=N%20Yasui-Furukori&author=M%20Hidestrand&author=E%20Spina&author=G%20Facciola&author=MG%20Scordo&volume=29&publication_year=2001&pages=1263-8&pmid=11560868&)

29. Spina E, Avenoso A, Facciola G, Salemi M, Scordo MG, Ancione M, Madia AG, Perucca E. Relationship between plasma risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone concentrations and clinical response in patients with schizophrenia. Psychopharmacology. 2001;153:238–43. doi: 10.1007/s002130000576.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s002130000576) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11205425/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Psychopharmacology&title=Relationship%20between%20plasma%20risperidone%20and%209-hydroxyrisperidone%20concentrations%20and%20clinical%20response%20in%20patients%20with%20schizophrenia&author=E%20Spina&author=A%20Avenoso&author=G%20Facciola&author=M%20Salemi&author=MG%20Scordo&volume=153&publication_year=2001&pages=238-43&pmid=11205425&doi=10.1007/s002130000576&)

30. Yoshimura R, Ueda N, Nakamura J. Possible relationship between combined plasma concentrations of risperidone plus 9-hydroxyrisperidone and extrapyramidal symptoms. Preliminary study. Neuropsychobiology. 2001;44:129–33. doi: 10.1159/000054932.  [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1159/000054932) | [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11586052/) | [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuropsychobiology&title=Possible%20relationship%20between%20combined%20plasma%20concentrations%20of%20risperidone%20plus%209-hydroxyrisperidone%20and%20extrapyramidal%20symptoms.%20Preliminary%20study&author=R%20Yoshimura&author=N%20Ueda&author=J%20Nakamura&volume=44&publication_year=2001&pages=129-33&pmid=11586052&doi=10.1159/000054932&)
