# Influence of CYP2C19 and ABCB1 polymorphisms on plasma concentrations of lansoprazole enantiomers after enteral administration.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Masatomo Miura, Satoru Motoyama, Yudai Hinai, Takenori Niioka, Masahiro Endo, Makoto Hayakari, Jun-ichi Ogawa
**Journal:** Xenobiotica; the fate of foreign compounds in biological systems
**Year:** 2010
**PMID:** 20528170

## Abstract

An intraoral annihilation enteric-coated preparation of lansoprazole is often administered via intestinal fistula. The purpose of this study was to determine the plasma concentrations of lansoprazole enantiomers after enteral administration in subjects with cytochrome P4502C19 (CYP2C19) and ABCB1 C3435T genotypes. Fifty-one patients who underwent a curative oesophagectomy for oesophageal cancer were enrolled in this study. After a single enteral dose of racemic lansoprazole (30 mg), plasma concentrations of lansoprazole enantiomers were measured 4 h post-dose (C(4h)). There were significant differences in the C(4h) of (R)- and (S)-lansoprazole and the R/S-enantiomer ratio for three CYP2C19 genotype groups (*1/*1, *1/*2 ± *1/*3, and *2/*2 ± *2/*3 ± *3/*3 (poor metabolizers (PMs)), but not the ABCB1 C3435T genotypes. In a stepwise forward selection multiple regression analysis, the C(4h) of (R)- and (S)-lansoprazole were associated with CYP2C19 PMs (p = 0.0005 and < 0.0001 respectively) and age (p = 0.0040 and 0.0121 respectively), while the R/S-enantiomer ratio was associated with CYP2C19*1/*1 (p = 0.0191) and CYP2C19 PMs (p = 0.0426). Direct administration to the jejunum is unaffected by residence time in the stomach and the gastric emptying rate. With enteral administration, CYP2C19 phenotyping of patients using the lansoprazole R/S enantiomer index at C(4h) could be possible.
