# Genetic polymorphism of CYP2C19 in Maharashtrian population.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Yogita Ghodke, Kalpana Joshi, Yashendra Arya, Anjali Radkar, Aditi Chiplunkar, Pooja Shintre, Bhushan Patwardhan
**Journal:** European journal of epidemiology
**Year:** 2007
**PMID:** 17978853

## Abstract

Inter-individual variability in drug response is well known. Genetic polymorphism in genes encoding drug-metabolizing enzymes results in variation in drug metabolism and in turn drug response. The cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYP) play a central role in the metabolism of many therapeutic agents. CYP2C19 gene polymorphism is widely studied in Caucasians, African, and Oriental populations; however, far less is known about other ethnic groups such as Indians. Indian population is an inter-mixture of the Aryan, Dravidian, Kolarain, and the Mongoloid races. CYP2C19 gene polymorphism is reported in North Indian and South Indian populations yet not much is known about Maharashtrian population of Australoid-Europoid origin residing in Western India. This is the first report on CYP2C19 allele and genotype frequencies in Maharashtrian population. In this study, genotypes of major allelic variants of CYP2C19 gene in 139 unrelated healthy Maharashtrian subjects was determined and their frequencies were compared with previously studied Indian and other populations. Meta-analysis revealed that the study population is distinct from Caucasians, Africans and some of the Asian populations and significant heterogeneity exists among Indian subpopulations.
