# Effect of the CYP2C19 polymorphism on the eradication rate of Helicobacter pylori infection by 7-day triple therapy with regular proton pump inhibitor dosage.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Jung Mook Kang, Nayoung Kim, Dong Ho Lee, Young Soo Park, Joo Sung Kim, In Jin Chang, In Sung Song, Hyun Chae Jung
**Journal:** Journal of gastroenterology and hepatology
**Year:** 2008
**PMID:** 18637061

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND AND AIM:** Proton pump inhibitors (PPI) are mainly metabolized by cytochrome P450 2C19 (CYP2C19) in the liver. We investigated whether the CYP2C19 genotype plays a role in the eradication rate of Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection in patients receiving pantoprazole- or esomeprazole-based triple therapy.

**METHODS:** A total of 327 patients infected with H. pylori were treated with either pantoprazole or esomeprazole, plus amoxicillin and clarithromycin for 7 days. The presence of the CYP2C19 genotype was determined by pyrosequencing.

**RESULTS:** The overall H. pylori eradication rate was 85%; 82.6% for the PAC regimen, and 88.3% for the EAC regimen; the differences were not statistically significant. The overall eradication rate in the poor metabolizer groups (PM) was significantly higher than in the extensive metabolizer groups (EM) (97.4% vs 83.3%; P = 0.016). The eradication rates in the EM and PM groups were 80.8% and 95.7% for the PAC regimen and 86.8% and 100% for the EAC regimen, respectively.

**CONCLUSION:** The results of this study suggest that the CYP2C19 genotype status may play a role in the H. pylori eradication rate in patients receiving pantoprazole or esomeprazole-based triple therapy.
