# Frequency distribution of high risk alleles of CYP2C19, CYP2E1, CYP3A4 genes in Haryana population.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Sachin Gulati, Anita Yadav, Neeraj Kumar, Kanupriya, Gaurav Kumar, Neeraj Aggarwal, Ranjan Gupta
**Journal:** Environmental toxicology and pharmacology
**Year:** 2014
**PMID:** 24814262

## Abstract

The genotype of an individual can significantly influence the disposition of a chemical, and determine their susceptibility to its toxicity. Many enzymes involved in either activation or detoxification of chemical carcinogen metabolism are polymorphically expressed, with the alleles presenting different enzymatic activities and some of them having been associated with susceptibility to cancer. Cytochrome P450 (P450 or CYP) constitutes the most important phase I enzyme group responsible for the metabolism of endogenous and exogenous (xenobiotics) substances. The present study was aimed to analyze the frequencies of commonly known polymorphisms of human xenobiotic metabolizing genes (XMG) in the Haryana State population of North India. The study was conducted in 308 healthy Haryana volunteers. DNA was extracted from leucocytes and the genetic polymorphisms in CYP2C19*2, CYP2C19*3, CYP2E1*5B and CYP3A4*1B were determined by digesting the PCR Product with restriction enzymes BamHI, SmaI, PstI and PstI respectively. The genotype frequencies of CYP2C19*2, CYP2C19*3, CYP2E1*5B, and CYP3A4*1B were found to be 22.0%, 0.0%, 2.11% and 2.0% respectively. The North Indian population which is known to be Caucasoid Aryans is ethnically different from South Indians known as Caucasoid Dravidians but no significant difference in genetic polymorphism was found.
