# Pharmacogenetics of esomeprazole or rabeprazole-based triple therapy in Helicobacter pylori eradication in Hong Kong non-ulcer dyspepsia Chinese subjects.

## Metadata
**Authors:** V W Y Lee, T S Chau, A K W Chan, K K C Lee, M M Y Waye, T K W Ling, F K L Chan
**Journal:** Journal of clinical pharmacy and therapeutics
**Year:** 2010
**PMID:** 20831535

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVE:** Our study aimed to assess the effectiveness of esomeprazole or rabeprazole in combination with amoxicillin and clarithromycin for the eradication of Helicobacter pylori in Hong Kong non-ulcer dyspepsia (NUD) patients.

**METHODS:** A prospective clinical trial was conducted at the Alice Ho Miu ling Nethersole Hospital outpatient endoscopy center from June 2004 to December 2005. Participants received amoxicillin 1 g, clarithromycin 500 mg, and, esomeprazole 20 mg (EAC) or rabeprazole 20 mg (RAC), all given twice daily for 1 week. The H. pylori status was determined by the [13C] urea breath test at least 4 weeks after completion of the treatment. Mutation status of CYP2C19 in exon 4 and exon 5 associated with the poor metabolizer phenotype was determined.

**RESULTS:** The intention-to-treat eradication rates in patients treated with RAC and EAC were 77% and 84.6% respectively, and per protocol-based eradication rates were 83.7% and 88.9% respectively. The eradication rates did not vary with CYP2C19 phenotype found. For clarithromycin-sensitive strains, the cure rates were statistically significant regardless of CYP2C19 polymorphism (P < 0.0001).

**CONCLUSION:** Triple therapy with either EAC or RAC is effective for Hong Kong Chinese NUD patients with H. pylori infection. Success eradication was related to clarithromycin resistance and not CYP2C19 genotype.
