# Genetic variability of CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 in seven indigenous groups from Mexico.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Katy Sánchez-Pozos, Carolina Rivera-Santiago, María Helena García-Rodríguez, María Guadalupe Ortiz-López, Barbara Itzel Peña-Espinoza, María de Los Ángeles Granados-Silvestre, Adrian Llerena, Marta Menjívar
**Journal:** Pharmacogenomics
**Year:** 2016
**PMID:** 27790940

## Abstract

**AIM:** CYP2C9 is one of the major drug metabolizing enzymes, however, little is known about polymorphisms in CYP2C9 gene and pharmacological implications in Mexican indigenous populations. Thus, frequencies of CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 alleles were evaluated in indigenous groups located in northwest (Cora), center (Mazahua and Teenek), south (Chatino and Mixteco) and southeast (Chontal and Maya) regions Mexico.

**MATERIALS & METHODS:** Allelic discrimination was performed by real-time PCR.

**RESULTS:** CYP2C9*2 allele was found only in Chontal and Maya groups, despite the low contribution of Caucasian component in these populations. CYP2C9*3 allele was present in all populations except in Mazahua, showing a wide genetic variability in the studied populations. Interestingly, we found significant differences between indigenous groups in CYP2C9*3 allele, even in groups located at the same region and belonging to the same linguistic family.

**CONCLUSION:** These results contribute to laying the pharmacogenetic bases in Mexico, in addition to improving treatment, taking into account the genetic interethnic differences.
