# Influence of CYP2C9 and VKORC1 gene polymorphisms on warfarin dosage, over anticoagulation and other adverse outcomes in Indian population.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Tejasvita Gaikwad, Kanjaksha Ghosh, Bipin Kulkarni, Vrinda Kulkarni, Cecil Ross, Shrimati Shetty
**Journal:** European journal of pharmacology
**Year:** 2013
**PMID:** 23602689

## Abstract

The aim of this study was to determine the frequencies of SNPs in the vitamin K epoxide reductase complex subunit 1 (VKORC1) and cytochrome P450 2C9 (CYP2C9) genes and their effect on warfarin dose requirement, over anticoagulation and other adverse outcomes in Indian population. A total of 145 warfarin treated patients for various clinical conditions were screened for VKORC1 and CYP2C9 gene polymorphisms by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) technique. We found that homozygous VKORC1-1639 AA and CYP2C9 (*)3/(*)3 polymorphisms showed 100% association with risk of over anticoagulation and other adverse events. Carriers of two heterozygous variant genotypes also showed significant association with risk of over anticoagulation and bleeding. Single variant carrier patients were found to require low warfarin dose as compared to wild type (CYP2C9(*)1/(*)1 and VKORC1- 1639 GG) patients. The major impact of VKORC1 and CYP2C9 genotypes was observed in the first month of anticoagulation. A drastic variation from other Asian countries was observed in Indian population with regard to the distribution of different VKORC1 -1639 genotypes. Our results suggest that both VKORC1 and CYP2C9 genotypes showed significant impact on warfarin dose requirement, over anticoagulation in the first month of anticoagulation and number of bleeding episodes. The variation in therapeutic dosage of warfarin and the associated adverse events across different populations is due to the wide differences in the frequency of these warfarin sensitive alleles.
