# CYP2C9 genotype modifies activity of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in hypertensive men.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Kati M Donner, Timo P Hiltunen, Timo Suonsyrjä, Tuula Hannila-Handelberg, Ilkka Tikkanen, Miia Antikainen, Ari Hirvonen, Kimmo Kontula
**Journal:** Journal of hypertension
**Year:** 2009
**PMID:** 19593208

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** Two variants of the CYP2C9 gene, CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3, have been indicated to have impaired enzyme function, and thus suspected to reduce the formation of the active metabolite of losartan. Cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes are also involved in eicosanoid biosynthesis and regulation of blood pressure (BP) and sodium homeostasis.

**METHODS:** We studied the impact of these variants on BP response to losartan and three other antihypertensive drugs and on baseline indicators of the activity of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. The participants were 217 moderately hypertensive Finnish men that participated in the double-blind, cross-over, placebo-controlled GENRES Study.

**RESULTS:** BP responses to losartan did not differ between CYP2C9*2 or CYP2C9*3 allele carriers and CYP2C9*1*1 patients. A suggestive finding of less pronounced ambulatory BP response to losartan in CYP2C9*1*3 patients with low-normal kidney function was made. At baseline of the GENRES Study, CYP2C9*1*3 patients had significantly lower plasma renin activity and aldosterone levels than CYP2C9*1*1 patients (both P values 0.004). In a replication study in patients with treatment-resistant hypertension, men with CYP2C9*3 allele also had lower plasma renin activity (P = 0.03) and aldosterone levels (P = 0.18). In addition, these men had attenuated renin and aldosterone responses in captopril challenge test (P = 0.29 and 0.006, respectively).

**CONCLUSION:** The CYP2C9*3 allele was associated with lower activity of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in hypertensive men, which may reflect a more efficient sodium reabsorption capacity. CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 alleles do not influence the antihypertensive effect of losartan in men with essential hypertension and normal kidney function.
