# Variant CYP2C9 alleles and warfarin concentrations in patients receiving low-dose versus average-dose warfarin therapy.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Andrea R Redman, Jack Zheng, Shahab A Shamsi, Jingguo Huo, Edward J Kelly, Rodney J Y Ho, Denise M Ritchie, Yuen Yi Hon
**Journal:** Clinical and applied thrombosis/hemostasis : official journal of the International Academy of Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis
**Year:** 2008
**PMID:** 17895500

## Abstract

This study compared the frequency of variant cytochrome P450 2C9 (CYP2C9) alleles and warfarin S/R concentration ratio in patients who required low-dose (<2.5 mg/day) and average-dose (5+/-0.5 mg/day) warfarin. Patients who achieved a therapeutic international normalized ratio were recruited from the Atlanta Veterans Affairs Medical Center anticoagulation clinic. CYP2C9*2 and *3 alleles were determined by validated Taqman allelic discrimination assays. Warfarin S and R concentrations were determined by chiral capillary electrochromatography with electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. At least 1 variant allele was found in 66.7% and 22.2% of patients in the low-dose and average-dose groups, respectively (P= .001, chi(2)). The warfarin S/R concentration ratio was 0.665 (range, 0.162-3.58) and 0.452 (range, 0.159-2.36) for patients receiving low-dose and average-dose therapy, respectively (P= .097). A warfarin requirement of <2.5 mg/day and an elevated warfarin S/R concentration ratio were each associated with a higher frequency of variant CYP2C9 alleles.
