# CYP2C9 polymorphism and warfarin sensitivity in Taiwan Chinese.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Herng-Der Chern, Tzuu-Huei Ueng, Yi-Ping Fu, Chun-Wen Cheng
**Journal:** Clinica chimica acta; international journal of clinical chemistry
**Year:** 2006
**PMID:** 16413010

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** Warfarin prevents thromboembolism in patients with prosthetic heart valvular replacement. Cytochrome P4502C9 (CYP2C9) is polymorphic in human and is principally responsible for the metabolism of warfarin. However, known CYP2C9 polymorphisms cannot entirely account for the low dose requirement of warfarin in Chinese-Taiwanese receiving mitral valve replacement. We screened a new polymorphism of CYP2C9 and investigated its role in warfarin sensitivity.

**METHODS:** We examined warfarin dose requirements in 239 Chinese-Taiwanese patients who had attended a cardiac surgery clinic in National Taiwan University Hospital. DNA samples were obtained from 106 Chinese-Taiwanese (37 patients and 69 unrelated healthy controls), and healthy control subjects of Caucasians (n=28) and African-Americans (n=28). Four out of those 37 patients were poor metabolizers of warfarin, and their DNA were subjected to sequencing analysis. Moreover, CYP2C9 genotyping analyses were performed using PCR-RFLP analysis. The chi2 test and Fisher's exact test were used to compare the differences of the allelic frequency and genotype. The association between warfarin dose requirement and genetic polymorphism of CYP2C9 was also analysed.

**RESULTS:** The mean daily warfarin dose was 3.11+/-1.62 mg for the maintenance of the international normalized ratio of 2 to 3 in 239 patients. A single nucleotide substitution from G to C was found in this study. This SNP, G-65/C, is in intron 3, 65 base pairs upstream of exon 4. The allelic frequencies of C-65 in healthy controls were 0.125, 0.058 and approximately 0 with respect to African-American, Chinese-Taiwanese and Caucasian, implying inter-ethnic variations of the C-65 allele. In addition, patients who were carrier of either the heterozygous or homozygous C-65 variant received half of the usual warfarin dose.

**CONCLUSION:** The novel intronic G-65/C mutation appears to be inter-racially different in allelic frequency, and that the anticoagulation was affected in response to warfarin sensitivity in Chinese-Taiwanese patients receiving mitral valve replacement.
