# Risperidone-associated adverse drug reactions and CYP2D6 polymorphisms in a South African cohort.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Tyren M Dodgen, Arinda Eloff, Connie Mataboge, Louw J L Roos, Werdie C W van Staden, Michael S Pepper
**Journal:** Applied & translational genomics
**Year:** 2015
**PMID:** 26937359

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** Contradictory information exists regarding the influence of CYP2D6 polymorphisms on adverse drug reactions (ADRs) (extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) and weight gain) related to risperidone treatment. This prompted us to evaluate the influence of CYP2D6 genetic variation in a cohort of South African patients who presented with marked movement disorders and/or weight gain while on risperidone treatment.

**METHODS:** Patients who were experiencing marked risperidone ADRs were recruited from Weskoppies Public Psychiatric Hospital. As poor or intermediate metabolism was expected, comprehensive CYP2D6 sequence variations were evaluated using XL-PCR + Sequencing.

**RESULTS:** No statistically significant association was found between CYP2D6 poor metabolism and risperidone ADRs. An inverse relationship between EPS and weight gain was however identified. A novel CYP2D6 allele was identified which is unlikely to affect metabolism based on in silico evaluation.

**CONCLUSION:** CYP2D6 variation appeared not to be a good pharmacogenetic marker for predicting risperidone-related ADRs in this naturalistic South African cohort. Evaluation of a larger cohort would be needed to confirm these observations, including an examination of the role of potential intermediaries between the hypothesised genetic and clinical phenotypes.
