# Genotypes for the cytochrome P450 enzymes CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 in human longevitY. Role of CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 in longevity.

## Metadata
**Authors:** L Bathum, K Andersen-Ranberg, J Boldsen, K Brøsen, B Jeune
**Journal:** European journal of clinical pharmacology
**Year:** 1998
**PMID:** 9754988

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVE:** To test whether some genotypes for CYP2D6 or CYP2C19 could contribute to longevity, we genotyped 241 Danish nonagenarians and centenarians for CYP2D6 and CYP2C19.

**METHODS:** For CYP2D6 we identified the alleles CYP2D6*1, CYP2D6*3 and CYP2D6*4 with allele-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The CYP2D6*5 alleles were identified with a long PCR method. For CYP2C19 we identified the alleles CYP2C19*1, CYP2C19*2 and CYP2C19*3 with an oligonucleotide ligation assay.

**RESULTS:** The four alleles for CYP2D6 did not occur in Hardy-Weinberg proportions. The frequency of poor metabolism was slightly higher (10.2%) than expected [7.7%; odds ratio (OR) = 1.36 (0.75-2.40)]. The genotypes for CYP2C19 occur in Hardy-Weinberg proportions. The frequency of poor metabolism (3.8%) was not significantly different from a young control group [3.1%; OR = 1.21 (0.26-5.75)].

**CONCLUSION:** CYP2D6 could play a role in human longevity due to the lack of Hardy-Weinberg proportions. If CYP2D6 only plays a role in longevity by protecting the poor metabolizers from cancer, we should expect a rise in the frequency in these genotypes in Denmark from 7.7% among young adults to 10-11% among very old people. We found a frequency of poor metabolism of 10.2% in the very old group. CYP2C19 is - due to the occurrence of Hardy-Weinberg proportions and the expected number of poor metabolizers unlikely to contribute to human longevity.
