# Phenotyping of CYP2C19 with enantiospecific HPLC-quantification of R- and S-mephenytoin and comparison with the intron4/exon5 G-->A-splice site mutation.

## Metadata
**Authors:** J Brockmöller, K L Rost, D Gross, A Schenkel, I Roots
**Journal:** Pharmacogenetics
**Year:** 1995
**PMID:** 7663532

## Abstract

S-Mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylase (CYP2C19) is a genetically polymorphic cytochrome P450. A modified method for CYP2C19 phenotyping was evaluated in 174 healthy German volunteers and the results were compared with genotyping for the intron4/exon5 G-->A splice site mutation (m1) of CYP2C19, associated with the poor metabolizer (PM) phenotype. A smaller than usual test-dose of 50 mg (R,S)-mephenytoin was used and urine samples were collected from 0 to 5 h and from 5 to 8 h after administration. Trait measurements included the mephenytoin S/R enantiomeric ratio and the hydroxylation index (i.e. the molar ratio of 4'-hydroxy-mephenytoin urinary recovery to the administered S-mephenytoin dose). S- and R-mephenytoin were quantified by isocratic HPLC with a Chiraspher column and 80% n-hexane and 20% dioxane as the mobile phase. All individuals from whom DNA was available (n = 140, including six phenotypically identified PMs) were analysed for the m1 mutation. The population frequency of this CYP2C19 mutation was 0.15. Four individuals were homozygous for m1 having S/R ratios of 0.9 or greater in both intervals of urine collection. Thus, individuals with an S/R ratio > or = 0.9 were classified as PMs and seven of all 174 phenotyped individuals were PMs (4%; 95% confidence limits: 1.6-8.1%). Heterozygous carriers of m1 (n = 34) had a median S/R ratio (5-8 h urine) of 0.06 compared to 0.01 in individuals without this mutation (n = 102; p = 0.0005, Mann-Whitney U-test). No such gene-dose relation was apparent with the hydroxylation index.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
