# CYP2C19 genotype-related efficacy of omeprazole for the treatment of infection caused by Helicobacter pylori.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Y Tanigawara, N Aoyama, T Kita, K Shirakawa, F Komada, M Kasuga, K Okumura
**Journal:** Clinical pharmacology and therapeutics
**Year:** 1999
**PMID:** 10579481

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVES:** Omeprazole is used for the treatment of infection caused by Helicobacter pylori, and it is metabolized by the polymorphic cytochrome P4502C19 (CYP2C19). We have found that the anti-H pylori efficacy by the combination of omeprazole and antibiotics is related to the CYP2C19 genotype.

**METHODS:** One hundred eight patients with cultured H pylori-positive gastritis or peptic ulcer were treated with three regimens: quadruple treatment without proton pump inhibitors (n = 25), dual treatment with omeprazole and amoxicillin (INN, amoxicilline) (n = 26), and triple treatment with omeprazole, amoxicillin, and clarithromycin (n = 57). The CYP2C19 genotype was determined by the polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method and the assessment of the eradication of H pylori was based on all negative examinations, including culture, histology, and 13C-urea breath test.

**RESULTS:** The eradication rates for the extensive metabolizers were 50% and 86% for the dual and triple treatments, respectively. In contrast, all of the poor metabolizers treated with omeprazole and antibiotics (n = 15) showed an eradication of H pylori.

**CONCLUSION:** The anti-H pylori effect of dual treatment is highly efficient for CYP2C19 poor metabolizers, which suggests that clarithromycin is not necessary as a first line of therapy for this type of patients. Genotyping can provide a choice for the optimal regimen based on individual CYP2C19 genotype.
