# Relation of genetic polymorphisms in the cytochrome P450 gene with clopidogrel resistance after drug-eluting stent implantation in Koreans.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Jung Myung Lee, Sungha Park, Dong-Jik Shin, Donghoon Choi, Chi Young Shim, Young-Guk Ko, Jung-Sun Kim, Eun-Soon Shin, Chong Won Chang, Jong-Eun Lee, Yangsoo Jang
**Journal:** The American journal of cardiology
**Year:** 2009
**PMID:** 19576320

## Abstract

Clopidogrel is a prodrug that has to be converted to an active metabolite by hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoenzymes to inhibit platelet aggregation. Individual variability of platelet inhibition by clopidogrel suggests a possibility for genetic factors having a significant influence on clopidogrel responsiveness. In this study, we sought to determine the relation of genetic polymorphisms of CYP genes to clopidogrel resistance in Koreans. Four hundred fifty patients who underwent successful percutaneous coronary intervention with drug-eluting stents were randomly assigned to treatment with dual antiplatelet regimen (aspirin plus clopidogrel) or triple antiplatelet regimen (aspirin plus clopidogrel plus cilostazol). Clopidogrel resistance using VerifyNow P2Y12 assay and genetic analysis were performed in 387 patients. Clopidogrel resistance was found in 112 patients (28.9%). In the clopidogrel-responsive group, there was a significantly higher proportion of cilostazol use. Because cilostazol showed a significant influence on clopidogrel resistance, we examined the association of single-nucleotide polymorphisms and clopidogrel resistance in the dual and triple antiplatelet therapy groups, respectively. In all subjects, the CYP2C19*3A allele was significantly more prevalent in the clopidogrel-resistant group compared with the clopidogrel-responsive group. Multiple logistic regression analysis demonstrated that CYP2C19*3 is an independent predictor of clopidogrel resistance. In conclusion, CYP2C19*3 single-nucleotide polymorphisms is an independent risk factor of clopidogrel resistance in Korean subjects with coronary artery disease.
