# CYP2C19 polymorphism as a predictor of personalized therapy in South Indian population.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Siva Prasad Siddapuram, Rupa Banerjee, Manu Tandan, Nitesh Prathap, Sasikala Mitnal, Nageshwar Reddy Duvvuru
**Journal:** The Journal of the Association of Physicians of India
**Year:** 2011
**PMID:** 21887904

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVES:** To study allelic variants of CYP2C19 gene in South Indians.

**METHODS:** A total of 220 individuals (167 Males and 53 Females) confirmed to be healthy on the basis of their physical examination and laboratory studies were recruited in the study. Genotyping of CYP2C19*2 and *3 polymorphisms was performed by a Polymerase chain reaction-Restriction fragment length polymorphism method.

**RESULTS:** The genotypic results of both CYP2C19*2 and CYP2C19*3 are considered to establish the frequency of poor metabolisers related to monooxygenase mediated drug metabolism. Individuals who were homozygous mutants for both m1 (m1/m1) and m2 (m2/m2) and heterozygous for both m1 and m2 (ml/m2) mutations were categorized as poor metabolisers. In the present study the frequency of Homozygous Extensive Metabolizers (HomoEM), Heterozygous Extensive Metabolizers (HetEM) and Poor Metabolizers (PM) are 32.2% (n = 71), 52.8% (n = 116) and 15.0% (n = 33) respectively.

**CONCLUSION:** Since inter individual genetic variations play crucial role in variety of drugs, the identification of intermediate and poor drug metabolizers based on CYP2C19 polymorphism can be a basis for the standardization of personalized therapy.
