# Limited frequency of the CYP2C19*17 allele and its minor role in a Japanese population.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Katsuyoshi Sugimoto, Tsukasa Uno, Hiroshi Yamazaki, Tomonori Tateishi
**Journal:** British journal of clinical pharmacology
**Year:** 2008
**PMID:** 18241287

## Abstract

**WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ABOUT THIS SUBJECT:** A novel CYP2C19 gene variant, CYP2C19*17, is associated with increased metabolic activity. Ethnic differences in the frequency of the variant allele have been reported. However, the frequency of the CYP2C19*17 allele has not been studied in the Japanese population.

**WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS:** In a population of 265 healthy Japanese subjects, a low frequency (1.3%) of the CYP2C19*17 allele was observed. The limited frequency of the *17 allele and the absence of a subject homozygous for *17 indicated that CYP2C19*17 would play a minor role in a Japanese population.

**AIMS:** We investigated the CYP2C19*17 allelic frequency in Japanese subjects, and evaluated whether CYP2C19*17 is an important determinant of interindividual variability of CYP2C19 activity.

**METHODS:** We enrolled 265 subjects to determine their CYP2C19 genotype and plasma metabolic ratio following a single dose of 40 mg omeprazole.

**RESULTS:** Seven subjects heterozygous for CYP2C19*17 and no *17/*17 subjects resulted in the CYP2C19*17 frequency being 1.3%. These heterozygotes had moderate metabolic activities when compared with the metabolic ratio of the other subjects.

**CONCLUSIONS:** The low frequency of CYP2C19*17 and the absence of *17/*17 indicates that CYP2C19*17 plays a minor role in the Japanese population.
