# Further evidence for the association of CYP2D6*4 gene polymorphism with Parkinson's disease: a case control study.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Anwarullah, Muhammad Aslam, Mazhar Badshah, Rashda Abbasi, Aneesa Sultan, Kafaitullah Khan, Nafees Ahmad, Jakob von Engelhardt
**Journal:** Genes and environment : the official journal of the Japanese Environmental Mutagen Society
**Year:** 2017
**PMID:** 28680508

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** Genetic and environmental risk factors play an important role for the susceptibility to sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD). It was hypothesized that a splice variant of the CYP2D6 gene (CYP2D6*4 allele) is associated with PD because it alters the ability to metabolize toxins and in particular neurotoxins. CYP2D6 codes for the drug metabolizing enzyme debrisoquine 4-hydroxylase. The CYP2D6*4 variant results in an undetectable enzyme activity and consequently in a reduction in metabolism of some toxins.

**METHODS:** Some of agricultural chemicals have neurotoxic potential and CYP2D6 is involved in their detoxification. Thus, we conducted a case control study to investigate the association of the CYP2D6*4 with PD in a Pakistani subpopulation that is known to be exposed to high levels of some agricultural pesticides, insecticides and herbicides.

**RESULTS:** We found a significantly higher allele and genotype frequency of the CYP2D6*4 variant in 174 sporadic PD patients when compared to 200 controls. In addition, there was a trend to an earlier age of PD onset and a tremor dominant phenotype in CYP2D6*4 variant carriers.

**CONCLUSION:** Our data provide further evidence that a poor metabolizer status may increase the risk to develop PD especially in populations that are exposed to environmental toxins.
