# Genetic variations and frequencies of major haplotypes in SLCO1B1 encoding the transporter OATP1B1 in Japanese subjects: SLCO1B1*17 is more prevalent than *15.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Su-Ryang Kim, Yoshiro Saito, Kimie Sai, Kouichi Kurose, Keiko Maekawa, Nahoko Kaniwa, Shogo Ozawa, Naoyuki Kamatani, Kuniaki Shirao, Noboru Yamamoto, Tetsuya Hamaguchi, Hideo Kunitoh, Yuichiro Ohe, Yasuhide Yamada, Tomohide Tamura, Teruhiko Yoshida, Hironobu Minami, Atsushi Ohtsu, Nagahiro Saijo, Jun-ichi Sawada
**Journal:** Drug metabolism and pharmacokinetics
**Year:** 2007
**PMID:** 18159134

## Abstract

A liver-specific transporter organic anion transporting polypeptide 1B1 (OATP1B1, also known as OATP-C) is encoded by SLCO1B1 and mediates uptake of various endogenous and exogenous compounds from blood into hepatocytes. In this study, 15 SLCO1B1 exons (including non-coding exon 1) and their flanking introns were comprehensively screened for genetic variations in 177 Japanese subjects. Sixty-two genetic variations, including 28 novel ones, were found: 7 in the 5'-flanking region, 1 in the 5'-untranslated region (UTR), 13 in the coding exons (9 nonsynonymous and 4 synonymous variations), 5 in the 3'-UTR, and 36 in the introns. Five novel nonsynonymous variations, 311T>A (Met104Lys), 509T>C (Met170Thr), 601A>G (Lys201Glu), 1553C>T (Ser518Leu), and 1738C>T (Arg580Stop), were found as heterozygotes. The allele frequencies were 0.008 for 1738C>T (Arg580Stop) and 0.003 for the four other variations. Arg580Stop having a stop codon at codon 580 results in loss of half of transmembrane domain (TMD) 11, TMD12, and a cytoplasmic tail, which might affect transport activity. In addition, novel variations, IVS12-1G>T at the splice acceptor site and -3A>C in the Kozak motif, were detected at 0.003 and 0.014 frequencies, respectively. Haplotype analysis using -11187G>A, -3A>C, IVS12-1G>T and 9 nonsynonymous variations revealed that the haplotype frequencies for (*)1b, (*)5, (*)15, and (*)17 were 0.469, 0.000 (not detected), 0.037, and 0.133, respectively. These data would provide fundamental and useful information for pharmacogenetic studies on OATP1B1-transported drugs in Japanese.
