# A cost effective RFLP method to genotype Solute carrier organic anion 1B1 (SLCO1B1) c.1929A>C (p.Leu643Phe, rs34671512); a variant with potential effect on rosuvastatin pharmacokinetics.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Nyarai D Soko, Collen Masimirembwa, Collet Dandara
**Journal:** BMC research notes
**Year:** 2018
**PMID:** 29898760

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVE:** This study describes a restriction fragment polymorphism protocol for rapidly screening the polymorphism SLCO1B1 c.1929A>C in genomic DNA samples. The polymorphism SLCO1B1 c.1929A>C has been associated with increased activity resulting in increased hepatic uptake of drugs. Currently SLCO1B1 c.1929A>C is genotyped using direct sequencing techniques and 5' nuclease based assays which can be cost prohibiting in resource limited settings. The aim of this study therefore was to design and validate a cost effective RFLP for genotyping the SLCO1B1 c.1929A>C polymorphism. This study was designed to investigate the effect of the polymorphism SLCO1B1 c.1929A>C on interindividual variability in rosuvastatin pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers of African descent.

**RESULTS:** We describe a restriction fragment length polymorphism method to genotype SLCO1B1 c.1929A>C polymorphism using the restriction enzyme Ase1. A student's t test with Welch correction was used to establish association between the SLCO1B1 c.1929A>C variant and rosuvastatin exposure. The frequency of the SLCO1B1 c.1929C allele amongst Zimbabweans was 6%. The SLCO1B1 c.1929C allele was associated with a 75% reduction (P < 0.001) in rosuvastatin exposure when compared to individuals carrying the wild type SLCO1B1 c.1929A allele. Polymorphism c.1929A>C may therefore play a significant role in rosuvastatin response. The RFLP method is quick and cost effective.
