# CYP3A5 genotype markedly influences the pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus and sirolimus in kidney transplant recipients.

## Metadata
**Authors:** L Renders, M Frisman, M Ufer, I Mosyagin, S Haenisch, U Ott, A Caliebe, M Dechant, F Braun, U Kunzendorf, I Cascorbi
**Journal:** Clinical pharmacology and therapeutics
**Year:** 2007
**PMID:** 17192769

## Abstract

It is currently not clear whether the concentration-time curves of the immunosuppressants differ with respect to the CYP3A5, MDR1, or MRP2 genotype in dose-adapted stable kidney transplant patients. Dose/trough concentration ratios were obtained in 134 tacrolimus and 20 sirolimus-treated patients, and plasma concentration-time profiles were obtained from 16 (tacrolimus) and 10 (sirolimus) patients. Genotyping was carried out for CYP3A5 6986A>G; ABCB1 2677G>T/A, 3435C>T and ABCC2 -24C>T; 1249G>A; 3972C>T. Dose/trough concentration ratios were 0.67+/-0.3 and 1.36+/-0.73 x 10(3) l (P<0.00001) for tacrolimus and 0.42+/-0.17 and 0.84+/-0.46 x 10(3) l (P=0.18) for sirolimus in CYP3A5 non-expressors and expressors. The unadjusted tacrolimus area under curve (AUC)(0-12) was 106.8+/-17.5 ng/ml x h compared with 133.3+/-42.2 ng/ml x h (P=0.37) without affecting serum creatinine. Mean unadjusted AUC(0-24) of sirolimus did not differ significantly either. Therefore, CYP3A5 expressor status and not transporter variants is a main determinant of oral clearance, particularly for tacrolimus. Dose adaptation according to trough levels, however, appears to be sufficient to maintain similar concentration-time profiles.
