# Differences in UGT1A1, UGT1A7, and UGT1A9 polymorphisms between Uzbek and Japanese populations.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Hiromichi Maeda, Shoichi Hazama, Abdiev Shavkat, Ken Okamoto, Koji Oba, Junichi Sakamoto, Kenichi Takahashi, Masaki Oka, Daisuke Nakamura, Ryouichi Tsunedomi, Naoko Okayama, Hideyuki Mishima, Michiya Kobayashi
**Journal:** Molecular diagnosis & therapy
**Year:** 2014
**PMID:** 24453052

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES:** Uridine-diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase 1A (UGT1A) is a key enzyme involved in irinotecan metabolism, and polymorphisms in the UGT1A gene are associated with irinotecan-induced toxicity. The aim of this study was to elucidate the allele frequencies of UGT1A polymorphisms in healthy Uzbek volunteers, and to compare them with those of the Japanese population.

**METHOD:** A total of 97 healthy volunteers from Uzbekistan were enrolled and blood samples were collected from each participant. Genotyping analysis was performed by fragment size analysis for UGT1A1*28, direct sequencing for UGT1A7*3 and UGT1A9*22, and TaqMan assays for UGT1A1*93, UGT1A1*6, UGT1A1*27, UGT1A1*60, and UGT1A7*12. The frequencies of polymorphisms were compared with the Japanese population by using the data previously reported from our study group.

**RESULTS:** When the Uzbek and Japanese populations were compared, heterozygotes or homozygotes for UGT1A1*28, UGT1A1*60, and UGT1A1*93 were significantly more frequent in the Uzbek population (P < 0.01). The rate of UGT1A7*12 was not significantly different between the two populations, whereas UGT1A1*6 and UGT1A9*22 were significantly less frequent in the Uzbek population (P < 0.05). UGT1A7*1 were less prevalent in the Uzbek population than in the Japanese population (P < 0.01).

**CONCLUSION:** The Uzbek population has different frequencies of polymorphisms in UGT1A genes compared with the Japanese population. A comprehensive study of the influence of UGT1A1 polymorphisms on the risk of irinotecan-induced toxicity is necessary for optimal use of irinotecan treatment.
