# Identification of factors affecting tacrolimus level and 5-year clinical outcome in kidney transplant patients.

## Metadata
**Authors:** In-Wha Kim, Hyejin Noh, Eunhee Ji, Nayoung Han, Su Hyun Hong, Jongwon Ha, Gilbert J Burckart, Jung Mi Oh
**Journal:** Basic & clinical pharmacology & toxicology
**Year:** 2012
**PMID:** 22469198

## Abstract

The purpose of this study was to identify and characterize the association of various clinical variables and CYP3A5 genotypes with the pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus and outcome over 1-5 years in kidney transplantation patients in Korea. A total of 129 recipients (aged 18-65 years) administered tacrolimus were genotyped for CYP3A5 (6986A>G in intron 3; rs776746). Clinical covariates and trough levels, doses and dose-adjusted trough levels of tacrolimus, as well as complications during the 1-5 years after transplantation, were analysed. A linear mixed model was used to investigate potential factors affecting the trough levels, doses and dose-adjusted levels of tacrolimus. We identified factors affecting chronic allograft nephropathy (CAN) and tacrolimus-related complications. After adjusting for sex, body-weight and doses of corticosteroids and mycophenolate mofetil, we noted that CYP3A5 genotypes had the most profound effect on the dose and dose-adjusted trough levels of tacrolimus 1-5 years after transplantation (p < 0.001). Trough levels of tacrolimus were associated with post-transplantation hyperlipidaemia (p < 0.05), and estimated glomerular filtration rate was associated with CAN (p < 0.05). Therefore, the CYP3A5 genotype is a variable marker for tacrolimus dose requirement, and the trough level of tacrolimus should be controlled to minimize post-transplant hyperlipidaemia to achieve optimum outcome.
