# Lack of association between arylamine N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) polymorphism and systemic sclerosis.

## Metadata
**Authors:** K Skretkowicz, J Skretkowicz, B Gawrońska-Szklarz, W Górnik, M Rychlik-Sych, A Sysa-Jedrzejowska
**Journal:** European journal of clinical pharmacology
**Year:** 2005
**PMID:** 15565348

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVES:** It has been shown that exposure to some environmental toxins may induce scleroderma-like illness in predisposed individuals, but the etiopathogenesis of the idiopathic form of systemic sclerosis (SSc) remains obscure. The genetic background of this illness has been confirmed in multiple studies. We investigated whether patients with SSc differ from healthy subjects with regard to the enzymatic activity of polymorphic N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2).

**METHODS:** The study was carried out in 39 patients with SSc; 15 fulfilled the criteria of diffuse SSc (dSSc) and 24 of limited SSc (lSSc); an ethnically matched control group consisted of 100 healthy volunteers. Acetylation phenotype was estimated using the isoniazid as a model drug. The most common mutations in the Caucasian population at positions 481T, 803G, 590A and 857A on the NAT2 gene were determined using the polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism method with deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) extracted from peripheral blood.

**RESULTS:** In the group of patients with SSc, the frequency of fast acetylator genotypes was 38.5% (95% CI 23.4-55.4), while that for the genotypes coding slow acetylator status was 51.3% (95% CI 34.8-67.6). There was a strong correlation between NAT2 phenotype and NAT2 genotype with a concordance of 97%. We did not observe a preponderance of slow acetylators among patients with SSc and in two subsets of SSc. With the sample size analyzed in the present study, there is a 90% probability of detecting significant differences in distribution of slow, fast, and intermediate phenotypes between patients with SSc and controls, there is a difference of at least 30.3, 28.7 and 21.9% in the distribution of these phenotypes in the general population, respectively.

**CONCLUSION:** Acetylator status does not seem to be the significant factor in the development of SSc in patients with both subsets of this autoimmune disease, but further studies are required to confirm this conclusion.
