# HLA-B*15:02 association with carbamazepine-induced Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis in an Indian population: a pooled-data analysis and meta-analysis.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Amy Hui-Ping Khor, Kheng-Seang Lim, Chong-Tin Tan, Su-Ming Wong, Ching-Ching Ng
**Journal:** Epilepsia
**Year:** 2014
**PMID:** 25266342

## Abstract

This study aimed to investigate the prevalence and association of HLA-B*15:02 with carbamazepine-induced Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis (CBZ-SJS/TEN) in the Indian population in Malaysia, which mostly originated from Southern India. HLA-B alleles in five Indian case patients with CBZ-SJS/TEN and 52 CBZ-tolerant controls, and followed by a pooled sample of seven cases from two centers in Malaysia were analyzed. Positive association for HLA-B*15:02 with CBZ-SJS/TEN was detected in Indians (40% [2/5] vs. 3.8% [2/52], odds ratio [OR] 16.7, p = 0.0349), of which 80% (4/5) of the Indian patients originated from Southern India. A pooled sample of seven cases showed stronger association between HLA-B*15:02 and CBZ-SJS/TEN (57.1% [4/7] vs. 3.8% [2/52], OR 33.3, 95% confidence interval [CI] 4.25-162.21, p = 1.05 × 10(-3)). Subsequent meta-analysis on Indians from Malaysia and India further demonstrated a significant and strong association between HLA-B*15:02 and CBZ-SJS/TEN (OR 38.54; 95% CI 6.83-217.34, p < 1.0 × 10(-4)). Our study is the first on Indians predominantly from Southern India that demonstrated HLA-B*15:02 as a strong risk factor for CBZ-SJS/TEN despite a low population allele frequency. This stressed the importance of testing for HLA-B*15:02, irrespective of the ancestral background, including populations with low allele frequency.
