# Genotype/phenotype discordance for human arylamine N-acetyltransferase (NAT2) reveals a new slow-acetylator allele common in African-Americans.

## Metadata
**Authors:** D A Bell, J A Taylor, M A Butler, E A Stephens, J Wiest, L H Brubaker, F F Kadlubar, G W Lucier
**Journal:** Carcinogenesis
**Year:** 1993
**PMID:** 8102597

## Abstract

Carcinogenic arylamines are acetylated by the hepatic N-acetyltransferase. This enzyme is polymorphic in humans and in some epidemiological studies, the slow-acetylator phenotype has been associated with higher risk of bladder cancer and lower risk of colorectal cancer. The presence of two germline copies of any of several mutant alleles of the NAT2 gene produces a slow-acetylation phenotype. We used a PCR-RFLP technique to identify three known slow-acetylator alleles (M1, M2 and M3). Comparison of results from PCR-RFLP genotyping with caffeine metabolism phenotyping in 42 individuals suggested that an additional slow-acetylator allele was present in our sampled population. We sequenced the NAT2 gene for several discordant slow-acetylator individuals and found a G > A base-change in codon 64 that caused a Arg > Glu amino acid substitution. This sequence change, termed the 'M4' allele, was found in all of the discordant individuals in our population and apparently causes a slow-acetylation phenotype. In addition, we have determined that NAT2 allele frequencies in 372 Caucasian-Americans (WT = 0.25, M1 = 0.45, M2 = 0.28, M3 = 0.02, and M4 = 0.00) and in 128 African-Americans (WT = 0.36, M1 = 0.30, M2 = 0.22, M3 = 0.02 and M4 = 0.09) are significantly different (P < 0.0001). The M4 allele was not found in 372 unrelated Caucasians and appears to be of African origin.
