# Role of CYP2C9 polymorphism in phenytoin-related metabolic abnormalities and subclinical atherosclerosis in young adult epileptic patients.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Kanitpong Phabphal, Alan Geater, Kitti Limapichart, Pornchai Sathirapanya, Suwanna Setthawatcharawanich
**Journal:** Seizure
**Year:** 2013
**PMID:** 23159358

## Abstract

**PURPOSE:** We investigated the influence of the CYP2C9 polymorphism on the lipid profile, insulin resistance, and subclinical atherosclerosis in young epileptic patients.

**METHODS:** We performed a cross-sectional study to evaluate the association between CYP2C9 polymorphism and lipid profile, glucose homeostasis, and subclinical atherosclerosis in young epileptic patients via the ankle brachial index.

**RESULTS:** The frequencies of CYP2C9*1 (CYP2C9 wild type gene) and CYP2C9*3 (CYP2C9 polymorphism gene) were 75% and 25%, respectively. The mean serum total triglyceride and LDL levels were significantly higher in the wild type gene subjects than in the CYP 2C9 polymorphism gene subjects. Also, the CYP 2C9 polymorphism had marginally significant lower mean serum HDL levels than the wild type gene subjects. No patients with CYP 2C9 polymorphism gene had elevated fasting blood sugar, and insulin resistance was found in only 10 of the 75 subjects. The mean ABI was statistically significantly lower in the wild type subjects than in the CYP2C9 polymorphism gene subjects.

**CONCLUSION:** Our study indicates that young epileptic patients with the CYP2C9 polymorphism gene have a low risk of subclinical atherosclerosis.
