# Multiplex PCR-pyrosequencing assay for genotyping CYP3A5 polymorphisms.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Christina L Aquilante, Taimour Y Langaee, Peter L Anderson, Issam Zineh, Courtney V Fletcher
**Journal:** Clinica chimica acta; international journal of clinical chemistry
**Year:** 2006
**PMID:** 16701601

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** The cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A5 enzyme contributes to the metabolism of many drugs. Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the CYP3A5 gene (CYP3A5(*)3C and CYP3A5(*)6) are associated with decreased CYP3A5 expression in the liver. We designed a multiplex genotyping assay to detect the CYP3A5(*)3C and CYP3A5(*)6 polymorphisms in a single polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and a single pyrosequencing reaction.

**METHODS:** A multiplex PCR assay was designed to simultaneously amplify 2 fragments, one containing the CYP3A5(*)3C polymorphism and the other containing the CYP3A5(*)6 polymorphism. Following PCR, multiplex genotyping was performed with pyrosequencing analysis.

**RESULTS:** Patient samples (n=69) were analyzed for the CYP3A5(*)3C and CYP3A5(*)6 polymorphisms using the multiplex PCR-pyrosequencing assay. Genotypes obtained by the multiplex reaction were in 100% concordance with genotypes obtained using simplex PCR-pyrosequencing (n=69) and direct DNA sequencing (n=29).

**CONCLUSIONS:** The advantage of this method is that the CYP3A5(*)3C and CYP3A5(*)6 polymorphism can be amplified in a single PCR reaction and genotyped in a single pyrosequencing reaction. This combined approach improves the time-efficiency and decreases the cost of CYP3A5 genotyping.
