# Differences in CYP3A5*3 genotype distribution and combinations with other polymorphisms between Spaniards and Other Caucasian populations.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Guillermo Gervasini, Sonia Vizcaino, Carolina Gasiba, Juan Antonio Carrillo, Julio Benitez
**Journal:** Therapeutic drug monitoring
**Year:** 2005
**PMID:** 16306861

## Abstract

The goal of this study was to detect genotypic differences between Spaniards and other related populations regarding CYP3A4*1B, CYP3A5*3, and ABCB1 (MDR1) C3435T polymorphisms. DNA from 177 Spanish patients were analyzed for the presence of these mutations using PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism or direct sequencing. The observed frequencies for CYP3A4*1B, CYP3A5*3, and C3435T alleles were within normal values in Caucasians (0.04, 0.91, and 0.5, respectively). However, 2.8% of the patients were homozygous for the wild-type CYP3A5*1 allele, an extremely uncommon genotype in other Caucasians. In addition, analysis of CYP3A4-3A5 haplotypes revealed the existence of 2 unusual subgroups: patients who were homozygous wild-type for both polymorphisms, and patients showing a CYP3A4*1A/*1B-CYP3A5*3/*3 genotype combination. The incidence of CYP3A5*1/*1 carriers and the occurrence of subjects combining the 2 above-mentioned unusual genotype combinations were more frequent in Spanish-Caucasians compared with American- or European-Caucasians. ABCB1 C3435T genotype frequencies were equally distributed between both single and combined CYP3A4 and 3A5 genotypes. These findings suggest that dose requirements for drugs metabolized by CYP3A and certain allele-disease association studies in white populations could show discrepancies in Spaniards.
