# Effects of Khat (Catha edulis) use on catalytic activities of major drug-metabolizing cytochrome P450 enzymes and implication of pharmacogenetic variations.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Worku Bedada, Fernando de Andrés, Ephrem Engidawork, Jemal Hussein, Adrián LLerena, Eleni Aklillu
**Journal:** Scientific reports
**Year:** 2018
**PMID:** 30143732

## Abstract

In a one-way cross-over study, we investigated the effect of Khat, a natural amphetamine-like psychostimulant plant, on catalytic activities of five major drug-metabolizing cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes. After a one-week Khat abstinence, 63 Ethiopian male volunteers were phenotyped using cocktail probe drugs (caffeine, losartan, dextromethorphan, omeprazole). Phenotyping was repeated after a one-week daily use of 400 g fresh Khat leaves. Genotyping for CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP3A5 were done. Urinary cathinone and phenylpropanolamine, and plasma probe drugs and metabolites concentrations were quantified using LC-MS/MS. Effect of Khat on enzyme activities was evaluated by comparing caffeine/paraxanthine (CYP1A2), losartan/losartan carboxylic acid (CYP2C9), omeprazole/5-hydroxyomeprazole (CYP2C19), dextromethorphan/dextrorphan (CYP2D6) and dextromethorphan/3-methoxymorphinan (CYP3A4) metabolic ratios (MR) before and after Khat use. Wilcoxon-matched-pair-test indicated a significant increase in median CYP2D6 MR (41%, p < 0.0001), and a marginal increase in CYP3A4 and CYP2C19 MR by Khat. Repeated measure ANOVA indicated the impact of CYP1A2 and CYP2C19 genotype on Khat-CYP enzyme interactions. The median MR increased by 35% in CYP1A2*1/*1 (p = 0.07) and by 40% in carriers of defective CYP2C19 alleles (p = 0.03). Urinary log cathinone/phenylpropanolamine ratios significantly correlated with CYP2D6 genotype (p = 0.004) and CYP2D6 MR (P = 0.025). Khat significantly inhibits CYP2D6, marginally inhibits CYP3A4, and genotype-dependently inhibit CYP2C19 and CYP1A2 enzyme activities.
