# Impact of cytochrome P450 3A and ATP-binding cassette subfamily B member 1 polymorphisms on tacrolimus dose-adjusted trough concentrations among Korean renal transplant recipients.

## Metadata
**Authors:** J-H Cho, Y-D Yoon, J-Y Park, E-J Song, J-Y Choi, S-H Yoon, S-H Park, Y-L Kim, C-D Kim
**Journal:** Transplantation proceedings
**Year:** 2012
**PMID:** 22310591

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** Tacrolimus is a substrate of cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A) and P-glycoprotein (P-gp), encoded by the CYP3A and ATP-binding cassette subfamily B member 1 (ABCB1) genes, respectively. This study was aimed to investigate the impact of CYP3A and ABCB1 polymorphisms on the tacrolimus pharmacokinetics and clinical outcomes in Korean renal transplant recipients.

**METHODS:** We analyzed data from a cohort of 70 renal transplant recipients receiving tacrolimus. CYP3A4*4, CYP3A4*5, CYP3A4*18, CYP3A5*3, ABCB1 C1236>T, ABCB1 G2677>T/A, and ABCB1 C3435>T polymorphisms were genotyped and correlated to dose-adjusted tacrolimus trough concentration at months 1, 3, 6, and 12 after transplantation.

**RESULTS:** Patients with the CYP3A5*3 alleles showed higher dose-adjusted tacrolimus concentrations for 12 months and higher trough levels until 6 months after transplantation. ABCB1 polymorphisms and haplotypes were not associated with tacrolimus concentrations. In a multivariate analysis, the presence of ≥1 CYP3A5*3 allele was a significant independent variable affecting dose-adjusted tacrolimus concentrations. Glomerular filtration rate, acute rejection, opportunistic infection, and graft survival were not affected by CYP3A5 polymorphisms. Calcineurin inhibitor toxicity, which showed higher tendency in patients with CYP3A5*1 alleles, might be associated with higher tacrolimus dose per kilogram.

**CONCLUSIONS:** The CYP3A5 genotype is a major factor in determining the dose requirement of tacrolimus, and genotyping may be of value in individualization of immunosuppressive therapy of renal transplant patients.
