# Population pharmacokinetic analysis of glimepiride with CYP2C9 genetic polymorphism in healthy Korean subjects.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Hee-Doo Yoo, Mi-Suk Kim, Hea-Young Cho, Yong-Bok Lee
**Journal:** European journal of clinical pharmacology
**Year:** 2011
**PMID:** 21476064

## Abstract

**PURPOSE:** The purpose of this study was to develop a population pharmacokinetic (PPK) model of glimepiride and to investigate the influence of genetic polymorphisms in CYP2C9 on the PPK of glimepiride in healthy Korean subjects.

**METHODS:** Serum data after a single oral dose of 2 mg of glimepiride in 177 healthy male Korean subjects (CYP2C9*1*1: 163 subjects, *1/*3: 14 subjects) were used. We estimated the PPK of glimepiride using a nonlinear mixed effects modeling (NONMEM) method and explored the possible influence of genetic polymorphisms in CYP2C9 on the PPK of glimepiride.

**RESULTS:** The disposition of glimepiride was best described with a two-compartment model with a Weibull-type absorption and first-order elimination. The visual predictive check indicated that the pharmacokinetic profile of glimepiride was adequately described by the proposed PPK model. The CYP2C9 genotypes as covariate significantly (P < 0.001) influenced the apparent oral clearance (CL/F) of glimepiride. The estimated CL/F of glimepiride was higher (1.60-fold) in CYP2C9*1/*1 subjects than in CYP2C9*1/*3 subjects.

**CONCLUSIONS:** This study indicates that genetic polymorphisms of CYP2C9 influence the substantial interindividual variability in the disposition of glimepiride, and these polymorphisms may affect the clinical response to glimepiride therapy.
