# Polymorphism of interleukin-1beta affects the eradication rates of Helicobacter pylori by triple therapy.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Takahisa Furuta, Naohito Shirai, Fang Xiao, Emad M El-Omar, Charles S Rabkin, Haruhiko Sugimura, Takashi Ishizaki, Kyoichi Ohashi
**Journal:** Clinical gastroenterology and hepatology : the official clinical practice journal of the American Gastroenterological Association
**Year:** 2004
**PMID:** 15017629

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND AND AIMS:** Polymorphism in interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) is associated with intragastric pH levels in Helicobacter pylori-positive subjects. Intragastric pH levels affect the activity of antibiotics against H. pylori in the stomach. The aim of this study was to investigate whether IL-1beta polymorphism is associated with eradication rates of H. pylori by triple therapy with a proton pump inhibitor (PPI), amoxicillin, and clarithromycin.

**METHODS:** Three hundred thirty-six patients infected with H. pylori completed treatment with omeprazole, 20 mg, or lansoprazole, 30 mg twice daily; clarithromycin, 200 mg 3 times daily; and amoxicillin, 500 mg 3 times daily, for 1 week. IL-1beta-511 and CYP2C19 genotypes of patients and sensitivity of H. pylori to clarithromycin and amoxicillin were determined.

**RESULTS:** Logistic regression analysis showed that the IL-1beta-511 polymorphism, as well as CYP2C19 genotype of patients and clarithromycin-resistance of H. pylori, was associated with successful eradication. Eradication rates for H. pylori were 77.3% (75 of 97; 95% confidence interval, 67.5-84.6), 89.6% (147 of 164; 95% confidence interval, 83.9-93.1), and 94.7% (95% confidence interval, 86.9-98.5) in patients with the C/C, C/T, and T/T genotypes of IL-1beta-511, respectively (P = 0.0014).

**CONCLUSIONS:** IL-1beta-511 polymorphism is one of the determinants of successful eradication of H. pylori using triple therapy with a PPI, amoxicillin, and clarithromycin, together with CYP2C19 genotype and bacterial resistance to clarithromycin.
