# First report of warfarin dose requirements in patients possessing the CYP2C9*12 allele.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Travis J O'Brien, Robert S Kidd, Craig A H Richard, Ngoc-Han Ha, Preston Witcher, Linda V Tran, April Barbour, Matthew Tuck, Samantha D McIntosh, Jacqueline N Douglas, Arthur F Harralson
**Journal:** Clinica chimica acta; international journal of clinical chemistry
**Year:** 2013
**PMID:** 23688605

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** Warfarin is the most frequently prescribed anticoagulant in North America and Europe. It is administered as a racemate, but S-warfarin is principally responsible for its anticoagulant activity. Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C9 is the enzyme primarily responsible for the metabolism of S-warfarin. Numerous variant alleles of CYP2C9 have been identified. The CYP2C9*12 (rs9332239) allele harbors a P489S substitution in CYP2C9 which has been shown to result in a 40% decline in catalytic activity in vitro.

**CASES:** Four Caucasian patients with a low mean weekly warfarin dose (MWWD) were genotyped for CYP2C9, VKORC1 and APOE variant alleles. None of the four patients carried the common CYP2C9 variant alleles (*2, *3, *5, *6, *7, *8, *9, *11, *13) despite a relatively low MWWD (23.4±7.94 mg) compared to 208 patients carrying the CYP29C9*1 genotype (32.2±12.65 mg). Given that CYP2C9*12 confers decreased in vitro activity to the enzyme, we investigated whether these patients carried this allele. All four patients were CYP2C9*12 CT heterozygotes. Individual comparisons with patients possessing the same VKORC1 and APOE genotypes also demonstrated lower dose requirements in the patients that possessed CYP2C9*12 allele.

**CONCLUSIONS:** There are no reports of the clinical impact of rs9332239 on CYP2C9 substrates. This is the first report of patients with the rare CYP2C9*12 genotype and lower warfarin dose requirements.
