# Testing for variants in CYP2C19: population frequencies and testing experience in a clinical laboratory.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Charles M Strom, Dana Goos, Beryl Crossley, Ke Zhang, Arlene Buller-Burkle, Michael Jarvis, Franklin Quan, Mei Peng, Weimin Sun
**Journal:** Genetics in medicine : official journal of the American College of Medical Genetics
**Year:** 2012
**PMID:** 22237437

## Abstract

**PURPOSE:** We sought to determine the genotype frequencies for cytochrome p450 enzyme 2C19 variant alleles both in the US pan-ethnic population and various US ethnic groups and to establish the frequency of clinically actionable genotypes.

**METHODS:** Analytical results were obtained from 1,396 consecutive samples submitted for cytochrome p450 enzyme 2C19 genotyping tests and stored in a proprietary database. This database was queried and genotypes and predicted phenotypes established. Anonymized samples were obtained from specimens submitted for cystic fibrosis genotyping that contained ethnicity information. Samples from 357, 149, and 346 individuals self-identified as white, African American, and Hispanic, respectively, were analyzed. In addition, 342 anonymized samples submitted for Ashkenazi Jewish panel testing were analyzed.

**RESULTS:** Significant ethnic differences were observed in the frequencies of the *17 ultrarapid allele among the various groups studied. In the pan-ethnic population, 3.8% of tested patients were classified as ultrarapid metabolizers, 24% as extensive metabolizers heterozygous for a *17 ultrarapid allele, 27% as intermediate metabolizers, and 3.5% as poor metabolizers. Using stringent criteria, 7.3% of individuals would have clinically actionable genotypes. In addition, we detected two individuals with a haplotype of *2/*17 and a single individual with a haplotype of *4/*17 indicating that the *17 hypermetabolic allele can occur on a *1, *2, or *4 background.
