# Genetic Polymorphism of Cytochrome p450 (2C19) Enzyme in Iranian Turkman Ethnic Group.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Robabeh Ghiyas Tabari, Abdoljalal Marjani, Ogholdondy Agh Ataby, Azad Reza Mansourian, Nader Mansour Samai
**Journal:** Oman medical journal
**Year:** 2013
**PMID:** 23904915

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVE:** Different findings indicate that CYP2C plays a clinical role in determining interindividual and interethnic differences in drug effectiveness. The ethnic differences in the frequency of CYP2C19 mutant alleles continue to be a significant study topic. The aim of the present study was to assess the frequency of allelic variants of CYP2C19 in Turkman ethnic groups and compare them with the frequencies in other ethnic populations.

**METHODS:** The study group included 140 unrelated healthy ethnic Turkman subject referred to the Health Center. Genotyping of CYP2C19 alleles (CYP2C19*1, CYP2C19*2, and CYP2C19*3 alleles) was carried out by Polymerase Chain Reaction-Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism technique.

**RESULTS:** The allele frequency of CYP2C19*1, CYP2C19*2 and CYP2C19*3 were 56.43%, 23.57% and 20%, respectively. The result also showed that 39.7% of subjects expressed the CYP2C19*1/*1 genotype. While 42.1%, 9.3%, 9.3% and 1.4% expressed CYP2C19*1/*2, CYP2C19*1/*3, CYP2C19*2/*2 and CYP2C19*3/*3 genotypes, respectively. The genotype CYP2C19*2/*3 was not expressed in this study population. The findings suggested that 10% of subjects were poor metabolizers by expressing CYP2C19*2/*2 and CYP2C19*3/*3 genotypes. Fifty one percent of subjects were intermediate metabolizers having CYP2C19*1/*2, CYP2C19*2/*3 and CYP2C19*1/*3 genotypes and 37.86% were found to be extensive metabolizers expressing CYP2C19*1/*1 genotype. The frequency of intermediate metabolizers genotype was high (51%) in Turkman ethnic groups.

**CONCLUSION:** This study showed that the determined allelic variants of CYP2C19 (CYP2C19*2 and CYP2C19*3 mutations) in Turkman ethnic group are comparable to other populations. These findings could be useful for the clinicians in different country to determine optimal dosage and effectiveness of drugs metabolized by this polymorphic enzyme.
