# Efficacy of triple therapy with rabeprazole for Helicobacter pylori infection in relation to CYP2C19 genotype.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Sang Bae Lee, Sang Jong Park, Ji Kon Ryu, Jin Kwang Lee, Hoi Jin Kim, Jin Soo Bae, Hyun Seung Jung, Sil Moo Park
**Journal:** The Korean journal of gastroenterology = Taehan Sohwagi Hakhoe chi
**Year:** 2003
**PMID:** 14695703

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND/AIMS:** Genetic polymorphism of cytochrome P450 CYP2C19 influences the efficacy of proton pump inhibitor (PPI) in Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) eradication therapy. We investigated the difference in the cure rates of H. pylori infection by triple (rabeprazole plus amoxacillin and clarithromycin) therapy in relation to CYP2C19 genotype status.

**METHODS:** One hundred and sixteen H. pylori infected patients with gastric ulcer and duodenal ulcer completed the triple therapy with 10 mg of rabeprazole b.i.d., 1,000 mg amoxacillin b.i.d. and 500 mg of clarithromycin b.i.d. for one week. The genotype of CYP2C19 was determined by a PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism method.

**RESULTS:** According to the univariate analysis, heterozygous extensive metabolizers (hetero EMs) and poor metabolizers (PMs) showed the highest (87.0%) and the lowest (80.0%) eradication rates, respectively. The difference in the therapeutic efficacy of rabeprazole among the different CYP2C19 genotypes was insignificant. With regard to gender, age and smoking history in relation to eradication rate, a statistical significance was noted only with age with odds ratio of 1.063 and p-value of 0.0202.

**CONCLUSIONS:** In the eradication therapy of H. pylori, no statistically significant difference in therapeutic efficacy of rabeprazole was found among different CYP2C19 genotypes.
