# CYP2C19 pharmacogenetics in the clinical use of proton-pump inhibitors for gastro-oesophageal reflux disease: variant alleles predict gastric acid suppression, but not oesophageal acid exposure or reflux symptoms.

## Metadata
**Authors:** L J Egan, G M Myhre, D C Mays, R A Dierkhising, P P Kammer, J A Murray
**Journal:** Alimentary pharmacology & therapeutics
**Year:** 2003
**PMID:** 12823155

## Abstract

**BACKGROUND:** The rate of metabolic inactivation of proton-pump inhibitors is determined by polymorphisms of CYP2C19. It is not known if CYP2C19 variant alleles affect responses to proton-pump inhibitor therapy in gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GERD).

**AIM:** To determine if the CYP2C19 genotype is associated with clinical effectiveness of proton-pump inhibitors during GERD therapy.

**METHODS:** GERD patients undergoing ambulatory gastric and oesophageal pH monitoring were genotyped for CYP2C19 polymorphisms.

**RESULTS:** Sixty subjects were enrolled. Forty-four subjects had two wild-type alleles, 15 had one variant, and one had two variant CYP2C19 alleles. The presence of a variant allele was significantly associated with a lower odds of gastric acid breakthrough during proton-pump inhibitor therapy [odds ratio 5.14, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.17-22.61]. The presence of a variant allele was not associated with a lower odds of significant oesophageal acid exposure (odds ratio 2.50, 95% CI 0.60-10.52), or the occurrence of symptoms (incidence rate ratio 1.06, 95% CI 0.54-2.06).

**CONCLUSIONS:** These results indicate that factors other than gastric acid secretion are important determinants of reflux in GERD patients. This suggests that CYP2C19 genotype testing will not be useful in proton-pump inhibitor therapy of GERD, except perhaps in identifying patients at risk for hypochlorhydria and consequent hypergastrinemia.
