# Distribution of CYP2C19*17 allele and genotypes in an Indian population.

## Metadata
**Authors:** D Anichavezhi, U S Chakradhara Rao, D G Shewade, R Krishnamoorthy, C Adithan
**Journal:** Journal of clinical pharmacy and therapeutics
**Year:** 2012
**PMID:** 21916910

## Abstract

**WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE:** CYP2C19*17 allele increases the metabolic activity of CYP2C19 resulting in decreased therapeutic levels of CYP2C19 substrates. There exist inter-ethnic differences in the distribution of this allele. The present study was aimed at establishing the allele and genotype frequencies of CYP2C19*17 in a South Indian Tamilian population. Furthermore, we describe the haplotype structure of the three common variant alleles of CYP2C19 in the Tamilian population.

**METHODS:** Two hundred and six subjects of South Indian Tamilian origin were genotyped for CYP2C19*17 allele by nested polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length polymorphism. A subset of 87 subjects were also genotyped for CYP2C19*2 and CYP2C19*3 alleles. After ascertaining linkage disequilibrium (LD), haplotypes were constructed. Allele and genotype frequencies, LD pattern and haplotype frequency were compared with those of the HapMap populations.

**RESULTS AND DISCUSSION:** The CYP2C19*17 allele frequency in the Tamilian population (n = 206) was found to be 19·2% (95% CI: 15·4 - 20·3). The CYP2C19*2 allele frequency (n = 87) was found to be 40·2% (95% CI: 32·9 - 47·5), whereas the CYP2C19*3 allele was not detected in the study subjects (n = 97). The high frequency of the CYP2C19*17 allele in the study population has resulted in a revision of frequencies for CYP2C19*1/*2 (31·0%) and CYP2C19*1/*1 (16·1%) genotypes in the Tamilian population. We also observed significant differences in haplotype structure and frequencies of these variant alleles in the HapMap population compared to Tamilian population.

**WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSION:** CYP2C19*17 allele is present at high frequency in the Tamilian population. This study also demonstrates the need for reassessment of wild-type allele frequencies in view of CYP2C19*17 allele. The estimated high frequency of CYP2C19*17 allele will aid in genotype-phenotype association studies in the Tamilian population. Further genotype-phenotype association studies are required to evaluate the clinical utility of this allele in South Indians.
