# Effect of drug transporter genotypes on pravastatin disposition in European- and African-American participants.

## Metadata
**Authors:** Richard H Ho, Leena Choi, Wooin Lee, Gail Mayo, Ute I Schwarz, Rommel G Tirona, David G Bailey, C Michael Stein, Richard B Kim
**Journal:** Pharmacogenetics and genomics
**Year:** 2007
**PMID:** 17622941

## Abstract

**OBJECTIVE:** Our aims were to evaluate the effects of polymorphisms in the hepatic drug uptake transporter organic anion transporting polypeptide 1B1 (OATP1B1, SLCO1B1) and efflux transporters multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2, ABCC2), bile salt export pump (BSEP, ABCB11), and breast cancer-related protein (BCRP, ABCG2) on single-dose pravastatin pharmacokinetics in healthy European- and African-American participants.

**METHODS:** The pharmacokinetics of a single oral 40 mg dose of pravastatin was determined in 107 participants (69 European-Americans and 38 African-Americans). Participants were genotyped for known OATP1B1, MRP2, BSEP, and BCRP polymorphisms. Baseline serum total and unconjugated plasma bilirubin concentrations were also determined.

**RESULTS:** OATP1B1 genotypes were ethnicity-dependent with a 521C allele frequency of approximately 15% in European-Americans and approximately 1% in African-Americans. SLCO1B1 521TC genotype was associated with significantly higher pravastatin area under the curve [AUC(0-5)] (P=0.01) and Cmax values (P<0.05). When analyzed by diplotype, SLCO1B1*1a/*15 (N=8) participants exhibited 45 and 80% higher AUC values than SLCO1B1*1a/*1a (N=29) (P=0.013) and SLCO1B1*1b/*1b (N=34) (P=0.001) carriers, respectively. SLCO1B1*15/*15 (N=2) participants exhibited 92 and 149% higher AUC values than SLCO1B1*1a/*1a (P=0.017) and SLCO1B1*1b/*1b (P=0.011) carriers, respectively. European-Americans had significantly higher plasma pravastatin AUC(0-5) (P=0.01) and Cmax values (P=0.009) than African-Americans. Neither ABCC2, ABCB11, nor ABCG2 genotypes were associated with differences in pravastatin pharmacokinetics. We did not observe an effect of SLCO1B1 genotype on baseline total or unconjugated bilirubin levels.

**CONCLUSION:** SLCO1B1 genotype, in particular the 521C allele, had a significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of pravastatin. Even when adjusted for the presence of the SLCO1B1 521C or 388G variant allele, European-Americans demonstrated significantly higher pravastatin AUC and Cmax values than African-Americans.
